{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf320
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww14360\viewh24200\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 This Etext file is presented by Project Gutenberg, in\
cooperation with World Library, Inc., from their Library of the\
Future and Shakespeare CDROMS.  Project Gutenberg often releases\
Etexts that are NOT placed in the Public Domain!!\
\
*This Etext has certain copyright implications you should read!*\
\
<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM\
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS\
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND\
MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES\
(1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT\
DISTRIBUTED OR USED COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL\
DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD\
TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>\
\
*Project Gutenberg is proud to cooperate with The World Library*\
in the presentation of The Complete Works of William Shakespeare\
for your reading for education and entertainment.  HOWEVER, THIS\
IS NEITHER SHAREWARE NOR PUBLIC DOMAIN. . .AND UNDER THE LIBRARY\
OF THE FUTURE CONDITIONS OF THIS PRESENTATION. . .NO CHARGES MAY\
BE MADE FOR *ANY* ACCESS TO THIS MATERIAL.  YOU ARE ENCOURAGED!!\
TO GIVE IT AWAY TO ANYONE YOU LIKE, BUT NO CHARGES ARE ALLOWED!!\
\
\
**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**\
\
**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**\
\
*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*\
\
Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and\
further information is included below.  We need your donations.\
\
\
The Complete Works of William Shakespeare\
A Midsummer Night's Dream\
\
November, 1997  [Etext #1113]\
\
\
The Library of the Future Complete Works of William Shakespeare\
Library of the Future is a TradeMark (TM) of World Library Inc.\
******This file should be named 1ws1710.txt or 1ws1710.zip*****\
\
Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, 1ws1711.txt\
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new NUMBER, 2ws1710.txt\
\
\
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at\
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A\
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment\
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an\
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes\
in the first week of the next month.\
\
\
Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)\
\
We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The\
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take\
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright\
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This\
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value\
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar, then we produce 2\
million dollars per hour this year we, will have to do four text\
files per month:  thus upping our productivity from one million.\
The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext\
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]\
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,\
which is 10% of the expected number of computer users by the end\
of the year 2001.\
\
We need your donations more than ever!\
\
All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU", and are\
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law ("CMU" is Carnegie\
Mellon University).\
\
Please mail to:\
\
Project Gutenberg\
P. O. Box  2782\
Champaign, IL 61825\
\
You can visit our web site at promo.net for complete information\
about Project Gutenberg.\
\
When all other else fails try our Executive Director:\
dircompg@pobox.com or hart@pobox.com\
\
******\
\
**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**\
\
\
***** SMALL PRINT! for COMPLETE SHAKESPEARE *****\
\
THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM\
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.,\
AND IS PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF\
CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY WITH PERMISSION.\
\
Since unlike many other Project Gutenberg-tm etexts, this etext\
is copyright protected, and since the materials and methods you\
use will effect the Project's reputation, your right to copy and\
distribute it is limited by the copyright and other laws, and by\
the conditions of this "Small Print!" statement.\
\
1.  LICENSE\
\
  A) YOU MAY (AND ARE ENCOURAGED) TO DISTRIBUTE ELECTRONIC AND\
MACHINE READABLE COPIES OF THIS ETEXT, SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES\
(1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT\
DISTRIBUTED OR USED COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL\
DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD\
TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.\
\
  B) This license is subject to the conditions that you honor\
the refund and replacement provisions of this "small print!"\
statement; and that you distribute exact copies of this etext,\
including this Small Print statement.  Such copies can be\
compressed or any proprietary form (including any form resulting\
from word processing or hypertext software), so long as\
*EITHER*:\
\
    (1) The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and does\
  *not* contain characters other than those intended by the\
  author of the work, although tilde (~), asterisk (*) and\
  underline (_) characters may be used to convey punctuation\
  intended by the author, and additional characters may be used\
  to indicate hypertext links; OR\
\
    (2) The etext is readily convertible by the reader at no\
  expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent form by the\
  program that displays the etext (as is the case, for instance,\
  with most word processors); OR\
\
    (3) You provide or agree to provide on request at no\
  additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the etext in plain\
  ASCII.\
\
2.  LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES\
\
This etext may contain a "Defect" in the form of incomplete,\
inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or\
other infringement, a defective or damaged disk, computer virus,\
or codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.  But\
for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below, the\
Project (and any other party you may receive this etext from as\
a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all liability to you for\
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees, and YOU HAVE\
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR\
BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO\
INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF\
YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.\
\
If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of receiv-\
ing it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid\
for it by sending an explanatory note within that time to the\
person you received it from.  If you received it on a physical\
medium, you must return it with your note, and such person may\
choose to alternatively give you a replacement copy.  If you\
received it electronically, such person may choose to\
alternatively give you a second opportunity to receive it\
electronically.\
\
THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER\
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS\
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT\
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A\
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of\
implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of consequen-\
tial damages, so the above disclaimers and exclusions may not\
apply to you, and you may have other legal rights.\
\
3.  INDEMNITY: You will indemnify and hold the Project, its\
directors, officers, members and agents harmless from all lia-\
bility, cost and expense, including legal fees, that arise\
directly or indirectly from any of the following that you do or\
cause: [A] distribution of this etext, [B] alteration,\
modification, or addition to the etext, or [C] any Defect.\
\
4.  WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?\
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of\
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed\
in machine readable form.  The Project gratefully accepts\
contributions in money, time, scanning machines, OCR software,\
public domain etexts, royalty free copyright licenses, and\
whatever else you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Pro-\
ject Gutenberg Association / Carnegie Mellon University".\
\
WRITE TO US! We can be reached at:\
     Internet: hart@pobox.com\
        Mail:  Prof. Michael Hart\
               P.O. Box 2782\
               Champaign, IL 61825\
\
This "Small Print!" by Charles B. Kramer, Attorney\
Internet (72600.2026@compuserve.com); TEL: (212-254-5093)\
****   SMALL PRINT! FOR __ COMPLETE SHAKESPEARE ****\
["Small Print" V.12.08.93]\
\
<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM\
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS\
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY\
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE\
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS\
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED\
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY\
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>\
\
\
\
\
\
1596\
\
A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM\
\
by William Shakespeare\
\
\
\
DRAMATIS PERSONAE\
\
  THESEUS, Duke of Athens\
  EGEUS, father to Hermia\
  LYSANDER, in love with Hermia\
  DEMETRIUS, in love with Hermia\
  PHILOSTRATE, Master of the Revels to Theseus\
  QUINCE, a carpenter\
  SNUG, a joiner\
  BOTTOM, a weaver\
  FLUTE, a bellows-mender\
  SNOUT, a tinker\
  STARVELING, a tailor\
\
  HIPPOLYTA, Queen of the Amazons, bethrothed to Theseus\
  HERMIA, daughter to Egeus, in love with Lysander\
  HELENA, in love with Demetrius\
\
  OBERON, King of the Fairies\
  TITANIA, Queen of the Fairies\
  PUCK, or ROBIN GOODFELLOW\
  PEASEBLOSSOM, fairy \
  COBWEB, fairy\
  MOTH, fairy\
  MUSTARDSEED, fairy\
\
  PROLOGUE, PYRAMUS, THISBY, WALL, MOONSHINE, LION are presented\
by:\
    QUINCE, BOTTOM, FLUTE, SNOUT, STARVELING, AND SNUG\
\
  Other Fairies attending their King and Queen\
  Attendants on Theseus and Hippolyta\
\
\
\
\
<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM\
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS\
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY\
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE\
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS\
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED\
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY\
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>\
\
\
\
SCENE:\
Athens and a wood near it\
\
\
ACT I. SCENE I.\
Athens. The palace of THESEUS\
\
Enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, PHILOSTRATE, and ATTENDANTS\
\
  THESEUS. Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour\
    Draws on apace; four happy days bring in\
    Another moon; but, O, methinks, how slow\
    This old moon wanes! She lingers my desires,\
    Like to a step-dame or a dowager,\
    Long withering out a young man's revenue.\
  HIPPOLYTA. Four days will quickly steep themselves in night;\
    Four nights will quickly dream away the time;\
    And then the moon, like to a silver bow\
    New-bent in heaven, shall behold the night\
    Of our solemnities.\
  THESEUS. Go, Philostrate,\
    Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments;\
    Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth;\
    Turn melancholy forth to funerals;\
    The pale companion is not for our pomp.     Exit PHILOSTRATE\
    Hippolyta, I woo'd thee with my sword, \
    And won thy love doing thee injuries;\
    But I will wed thee in another key,\
    With pomp, with triumph, and with revelling.\
\
          Enter EGEUS, and his daughter HERMIA, LYSANDER,\
                           and DEMETRIUS\
\
  EGEUS. Happy be Theseus, our renowned Duke!\
  THESEUS. Thanks, good Egeus; what's the news with thee?\
  EGEUS. Full of vexation come I, with complaint\
    Against my child, my daughter Hermia.\
    Stand forth, Demetrius. My noble lord,\
    This man hath my consent to marry her.\
    Stand forth, Lysander. And, my gracious Duke,\
    This man hath bewitch'd the bosom of my child.\
    Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes,\
    And interchang'd love-tokens with my child;\
    Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung,\
    With feigning voice, verses of feigning love,\
    And stol'n the impression of her fantasy \
    With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gawds, conceits,\
    Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats- messengers\
    Of strong prevailment in unhardened youth;\
    With cunning hast thou filch'd my daughter's heart;\
    Turn'd her obedience, which is due to me,\
    To stubborn harshness. And, my gracious Duke,\
    Be it so she will not here before your Grace\
    Consent to marry with Demetrius,\
    I beg the ancient privilege of Athens:\
    As she is mine I may dispose of her;\
    Which shall be either to this gentleman\
    Or to her death, according to our law\
    Immediately provided in that case.\
  THESEUS. What say you, Hermia? Be advis'd, fair maid.\
    To you your father should be as a god;\
    One that compos'd your beauties; yea, and one\
    To whom you are but as a form in wax,\
    By him imprinted, and within his power\
    To leave the figure, or disfigure it.\
    Demetrius is a worthy gentleman. \
  HERMIA. So is Lysander.\
  THESEUS. In himself he is;\
    But, in this kind, wanting your father's voice,\
    The other must be held the worthier.\
  HERMIA. I would my father look'd but with my eyes.\
  THESEUS. Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.\
  HERMIA. I do entreat your Grace to pardon me.\
    I know not by what power I am made bold,\
    Nor how it may concern my modesty\
    In such a presence here to plead my thoughts;\
    But I beseech your Grace that I may know\
    The worst that may befall me in this case,\
    If I refuse to wed Demetrius.\
  THESEUS. Either to die the death, or to abjure\
    For ever the society of men.\
    Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires,\
    Know of your youth, examine well your blood,\
    Whether, if you yield not to your father's choice,\
    You can endure the livery of a nun,\
    For aye to be shady cloister mew'd, \
    To live a barren sister all your life,\
    Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon.\
    Thrice-blessed they that master so their blood\
    To undergo such maiden pilgrimage;\
    But earthlier happy is the rose distill'd\
    Than that which withering on the virgin thorn\
    Grows, lives, and dies, in single blessedness.\
  HERMIA. So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord,\
    Ere I will yield my virgin patent up\
    Unto his lordship, whose unwished yoke\
    My soul consents not to give sovereignty.\
  THESEUS. Take time to pause; and by the next new moon-\
    The sealing-day betwixt my love and me\
    For everlasting bond of fellowship-\
    Upon that day either prepare to die\
    For disobedience to your father's will,\
    Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would,\
    Or on Diana's altar to protest\
    For aye austerity and single life.\
  DEMETRIUS. Relent, sweet Hermia; and, Lysander, yield \
    Thy crazed title to my certain right.\
  LYSANDER. You have her father's love, Demetrius;\
    Let me have Hermia's; do you marry him.\
  EGEUS. Scornful Lysander, true, he hath my love;\
    And what is mine my love shall render him;\
    And she is mine; and all my right of her\
    I do estate unto Demetrius.\
  LYSANDER. I am, my lord, as well deriv'd as he,\
    As well possess'd; my love is more than his;\
    My fortunes every way as fairly rank'd,\
    If not with vantage, as Demetrius';\
    And, which is more than all these boasts can be,\
    I am belov'd of beauteous Hermia.\
    Why should not I then prosecute my right?\
    Demetrius, I'll avouch it to his head,\
    Made love to Nedar's daughter, Helena,\
    And won her soul; and she, sweet lady, dotes,\
    Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry,\
    Upon this spotted and inconstant man.\
  THESEUS. I must confess that I have heard so much, \
    And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof;\
    But, being over-full of self-affairs,\
    My mind did lose it. But, Demetrius, come;\
    And come, Egeus; you shall go with me;\
    I have some private schooling for you both.\
    For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself\
    To fit your fancies to your father's will,\
    Or else the law of Athens yields you up-\
    Which by no means we may extenuate-\
    To death, or to a vow of single life.\
    Come, my Hippolyta; what cheer, my love?\
    Demetrius, and Egeus, go along;\
    I must employ you in some business\
    Against our nuptial, and confer with you\
    Of something nearly that concerns yourselves.\
  EGEUS. With duty and desire we follow you.\
                              Exeunt all but LYSANDER and HERMIA\
  LYSANDER. How now, my love! Why is your cheek so pale?\
    How chance the roses there do fade so fast?\
  HERMIA. Belike for want of rain, which I could well \
    Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.\
  LYSANDER. Ay me! for aught that I could ever read,\
    Could ever hear by tale or history,\
    The course of true love never did run smooth;\
    But either it was different in blood-\
  HERMIA. O cross! too high to be enthrall'd to low.\
  LYSANDER. Or else misgraffed in respect of years-\
  HERMIA. O spite! too old to be engag'd to young.\
  LYSANDER. Or else it stood upon the choice of friends-\
  HERMIA. O hell! to choose love by another's eyes.\
  LYSANDER. Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,\
    War, death, or sickness, did lay siege to it,\
    Making it momentary as a sound,\
    Swift as a shadow, short as any dream,\
    Brief as the lightning in the collied night\
    That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth,\
    And ere a man hath power to say 'Behold!'\
    The jaws of darkness do devour it up;\
    So quick bright things come to confusion.\
  HERMIA. If then true lovers have ever cross'd, \
    It stands as an edict in destiny.\
    Then let us teach our trial patience,\
    Because it is a customary cross,\
    As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,\
    Wishes and tears, poor Fancy's followers.\
  LYSANDER. A good persuasion; therefore, hear me, Hermia.\
    I have a widow aunt, a dowager\
    Of great revenue, and she hath no child-\
    From Athens is her house remote seven leagues-\
    And she respects me as her only son.\
    There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee;\
    And to that place the sharp Athenian law\
    Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me then,\
    Steal forth thy father's house to-morrow night;\
    And in the wood, a league without the town,\
    Where I did meet thee once with Helena\
    To do observance to a morn of May,\
    There will I stay for thee.\
  HERMIA. My good Lysander!\
    I swear to thee by Cupid's strongest bow, \
    By his best arrow, with the golden head,\
    By the simplicity of Venus' doves,\
    By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,\
    And by that fire which burn'd the Carthage Queen,\
    When the false Troyan under sail was seen,\
    By all the vows that ever men have broke,\
    In number more than ever women spoke,\
    In that same place thou hast appointed me,\
    To-morrow truly will I meet with thee.\
  LYSANDER. Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena.\
\
                         Enter HELENA\
\
  HERMIA. God speed fair Helena! Whither away?\
  HELENA. Call you me fair? That fair again unsay.\
    Demetrius loves your fair. O happy fair!\
    Your eyes are lode-stars and your tongue's sweet air\
    More tuneable than lark to shepherd's ear,\
    When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear.\
    Sickness is catching; O, were favour so, \
    Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go!\
    My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye,\
    My tongue should catch your tongue's sweet melody.\
    Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated,\
    The rest I'd give to be to you translated.\
    O, teach me how you look, and with what art\
    You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart!\
  HERMIA. I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.\
  HELENA. O that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!\
  HERMIA. I give him curses, yet he gives me love.\
  HELENA. O that my prayers could such affection move!\
  HERMIA. The more I hate, the more he follows me.\
  HELENA. The more I love, the more he hateth me.\
  HERMIA. His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.\
  HELENA. None, but your beauty; would that fault were mine!\
  HERMIA. Take comfort: he no more shall see my face;\
    Lysander and myself will fly this place.\
    Before the time I did Lysander see,\
    Seem'd Athens as a paradise to me.\
    O, then, what graces in my love do dwell, \
    That he hath turn'd a heaven unto a hell!\
  LYSANDER. Helen, to you our minds we will unfold:\
    To-morrow night, when Phoebe doth behold\
    Her silver visage in the wat'ry glass,\
    Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass,\
    A time that lovers' flights doth still conceal,\
    Through Athens' gates have we devis'd to steal.\
  HERMIA. And in the wood where often you and I\
    Upon faint primrose beds were wont to lie,\
    Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,\
    There my Lysander and myself shall meet;\
    And thence from Athens turn away our eyes,\
    To seek new friends and stranger companies.\
    Farewell, sweet playfellow; pray thou for us,\
    And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius!\
    Keep word, Lysander; we must starve our sight\
    From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight.\
  LYSANDER. I will, my Hermia. [Exit HERMIA] Helena, adieu;\
    As you on him, Demetrius dote on you.                   Exit\
  HELENA. How happy some o'er other some can be! \
    Through Athens I am thought as fair as she.\
    But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so;\
    He will not know what all but he do know.\
    And as he errs, doting on Hermia's eyes,\
    So I, admiring of his qualities.\
    Things base and vile, holding no quantity,\
    Love can transpose to form and dignity.\
    Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind;\
    And therefore is wing'd Cupid painted blind.\
    Nor hath Love's mind of any judgment taste;\
    Wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste;\
    And therefore is Love said to be a child,\
    Because in choice he is so oft beguil'd.\
    As waggish boys in game themselves forswear,\
    So the boy Love is perjur'd everywhere;\
    For ere Demetrius look'd on Hermia's eyne,\
    He hail'd down oaths that he was only mine;\
    And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,\
    So he dissolv'd, and show'rs of oaths did melt.\
    I will go tell him of fair Hermia's flight; \
    Then to the wood will he to-morrow night\
    Pursue her; and for this intelligence\
    If I have thanks, it is a dear expense.\
    But herein mean I to enrich my pain,\
    To have his sight thither and back again.               Exit\
\
\
\
\
SCENE II.\
Athens. QUINCE'S house\
\
Enter QUINCE, SNUG, BOTTOM FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING\
\
  QUINCE. Is all our company here?\
  BOTTOM. You were best to call them generally, man by man,\
according\
    to the scrip.\
  QUINCE. Here is the scroll of every man's name which is thought\
    fit, through all Athens, to play in our interlude before the\
Duke\
    and the Duchess on his wedding-day at night.\
  BOTTOM. First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats on;\
then\
    read the names of the actors; and so grow to a point.\
  QUINCE. Marry, our play is 'The most Lamentable Comedy and most\
    Cruel Death of Pyramus and Thisby.'\
  BOTTOM. A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a merry.\
Now,\
    good Peter Quince, call forth your actors by the scroll.\
Masters,\
    spread yourselves.\
  QUINCE. Answer, as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver.\
  BOTTOM. Ready. Name what part I am for, and proceed.\
  QUINCE. You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus. \
  BOTTOM. What is Pyramus? A lover, or a tyrant?\
  QUINCE. A lover, that kills himself most gallant for love.\
  BOTTOM. That will ask some tears in the true performing of it.\
If I\
    do it, let the audience look to their eyes; I will move\
storms; I\
    will condole in some measure. To the rest- yet my chief\
humour is\
    for a tyrant. I could play Ercles rarely, or a part to tear a\
cat\
    in, to make all split.\
\
                 'The raging rocks\
                 And shivering shocks\
                 Shall break the locks\
                   Of prison gates;\
\
                 And Phibbus' car\
                 Shall shine from far,\
                 And make and mar\
                   The foolish Fates.'\
\
    This was lofty. Now name the rest of the players. This is\
    Ercles' vein, a tyrant's vein: a lover is more condoling. \
  QUINCE. Francis Flute, the bellows-mender.\
  FLUTE. Here, Peter Quince.\
  QUINCE. Flute, you must take Thisby on you.\
  FLUTE. What is Thisby? A wand'ring knight?\
  QUINCE. It is the lady that Pyramus must love.\
  FLUTE. Nay, faith, let not me play a woman; I have a beard\
coming.\
  QUINCE. That's all one; you shall play it in a mask, and you\
may\
    speak as small as you will.\
  BOTTOM. An I may hide my face, let me play Thisby too.\
    I'll speak in a monstrous little voice: 'Thisne, Thisne!'\
    [Then speaking small] 'Ah Pyramus, my lover dear! Thy\
    Thisby dear, and lady dear!'\
  QUINCE. No, no, you must play Pyramus; and, Flute, you Thisby.\
  BOTTOM. Well, proceed.\
  QUINCE. Robin Starveling, the tailor.\
  STARVELING. Here, Peter Quince.\
  QUINCE. Robin Starveling, you must play Thisby's mother.\
    Tom Snout, the tinker.\
  SNOUT. Here, Peter Quince.\
  QUINCE. You, Pyramus' father; myself, Thisby's father; Snug,\
the \
    joiner, you, the lion's part. And, I hope, here is a play\
fitted.\
  SNUG. Have you the lion's part written? Pray you, if it be,\
give it\
    me, for I am slow of study.\
  QUINCE. You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.\
  BOTTOM. Let me play the lion too. I will roar that I will do\
any\
    man's heart good to hear me; I will roar that I will make the\
    Duke say 'Let him roar again, let him roar again.'\
  QUINCE. An you should do it too terribly, you would fright the\
    Duchess and the ladies, that they would shriek; and that were\
    enough to hang us all.\
  ALL. That would hang us, every mother's son.\
  BOTTOM. I grant you, friends, if you should fright the ladies\
out\
    of their wits, they would have no more discretion but to hang\
us;\
    but I will aggravate my voice so, that I will roar you as\
gently\
    as any sucking dove; I will roar you an 'twere any\
nightingale.\
  QUINCE. You can play no part but Pyramus; for Pyramus is a\
    sweet-fac'd man; a proper man, as one shall see in a summer's\
    day; a most lovely gentleman-like man; therefore you must\
needs\
    play Pyramus.\
  BOTTOM. Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I best to\
play \
    it in?\
  QUINCE. Why, what you will.\
  BOTTOM. I will discharge it in either your straw-colour beard,\
your\
    orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain beard, or your\
    French-crown-colour beard, your perfect yellow.\
  QUINCE. Some of your French crowns have no hair at all, and\
then\
    you will play bare-fac'd. But, masters, here are your parts;\
and\
    I am to entreat you, request you, and desire you, to con them\
by\
    to-morrow night; and meet me in the palace wood, a mile\
without\
    the town, by moonlight; there will we rehearse; for if we\
meet in\
    the city, we shall be dogg'd with company, and our devices\
known.\
    In the meantime I will draw a bill of properties, such as our\
    play wants. I pray you, fail me not.\
  BOTTOM. We will meet; and there we may rehearse most obscenely\
and\
    courageously. Take pains; be perfect; adieu.\
  QUINCE. At the Duke's oak we meet.\
  BOTTOM. Enough; hold, or cut bow-strings.               Exeunt\
\
\
\
\
<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM\
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS\
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY\
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE\
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS\
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED\
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY\
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>\
\
\
\
ACT II. SCENE I.\
A wood near Athens\
\
Enter a FAIRY at One door, and PUCK at another\
\
  PUCK. How now, spirit! whither wander you?\
  FAIRY.      Over hill, over dale,\
                Thorough bush, thorough brier,\
              Over park, over pale,\
                Thorough flood, thorough fire,\
              I do wander every where,\
              Swifter than the moon's sphere;\
              And I serve the Fairy Queen,\
              To dew her orbs upon the green.\
              The cowslips tall her pensioners be;\
              In their gold coats spots you see;\
              Those be rubies, fairy favours,\
              In those freckles live their savours.\
\
    I must go seek some dewdrops here,\
    And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear.\
    Farewell, thou lob of spirits; I'll be gone. \
    Our Queen and all her elves come here anon.\
  PUCK. The King doth keep his revels here to-night;\
    Take heed the Queen come not within his sight;\
    For Oberon is passing fell and wrath,\
    Because that she as her attendant hath\
    A lovely boy, stolen from an Indian king.\
    She never had so sweet a changeling;\
    And jealous Oberon would have the child\
    Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild;\
    But she perforce withholds the loved boy,\
    Crowns him with flowers, and makes him all her joy.\
    And now they never meet in grove or green,\
    By fountain clear, or spangled starlight sheen,\
    But they do square, that all their elves for fear\
    Creep into acorn cups and hide them there.\
  FAIRY. Either I mistake your shape and making quite,\
    Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite\
    Call'd Robin Goodfellow. Are not you he\
    That frights the maidens of the villagery,\
    Skim milk, and sometimes labour in the quern, \
    And bootless make the breathless housewife churn,\
    And sometime make the drink to bear no barm,\
    Mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm?\
    Those that Hobgoblin call you, and sweet Puck,\
    You do their work, and they shall have good luck.\
    Are not you he?\
  PUCK. Thou speakest aright:\
    I am that merry wanderer of the night.\
    I jest to Oberon, and make him smile\
    When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,\
    Neighing in likeness of a filly foal;\
    And sometime lurk I in a gossip's bowl\
    In very likeness of a roasted crab,\
    And, when she drinks, against her lips I bob,\
    And on her withered dewlap pour the ale.\
    The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,\
    Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me;\
    Then slip I from her bum, down topples she,\
    And 'tailor' cries, and falls into a cough;\
    And then the whole quire hold their hips and laugh, \
    And waxen in their mirth, and neeze, and swear\
    A merrier hour was never wasted there.\
    But room, fairy, here comes Oberon.\
  FAIRY. And here my mistress. Would that he were gone!\
\
       Enter OBERON at one door, with his TRAIN, and TITANIA,\
                        at another, with hers\
\
  OBERON. Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania.\
  TITANIA. What, jealous Oberon! Fairies, skip hence;\
    I have forsworn his bed and company.\
  OBERON. Tarry, rash wanton; am not I thy lord?\
  TITANIA. Then I must be thy lady; but I know\
    When thou hast stolen away from fairy land,\
    And in the shape of Corin sat all day,\
    Playing on pipes of corn, and versing love\
    To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here,\
    Come from the farthest steep of India,\
    But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon,\
    Your buskin'd mistress and your warrior love, \
    To Theseus must be wedded, and you come\
    To give their bed joy and prosperity?\
  OBERON. How canst thou thus, for shame, Titania,\
    Glance at my credit with Hippolyta,\
    Knowing I know thy love to Theseus?\
    Didst not thou lead him through the glimmering night\
    From Perigouna, whom he ravished?\
    And make him with fair Aegles break his faith,\
    With Ariadne and Antiopa?\
  TITANIA. These are the forgeries of jealousy;\
    And never, since the middle summer's spring,\
    Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead,\
    By paved fountain, or by rushy brook,\
    Or in the beached margent of the sea,\
    To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind,\
    But with thy brawls thou hast disturb'd our sport.\
    Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain,\
    As in revenge, have suck'd up from the sea\
    Contagious fogs; which, falling in the land,\
    Hath every pelting river made so proud \
    That they have overborne their continents.\
    The ox hath therefore stretch'd his yoke in vain,\
    The ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn\
    Hath rotted ere his youth attain'd a beard;\
    The fold stands empty in the drowned field,\
    And crows are fatted with the murrion flock;\
    The nine men's morris is fill'd up with mud,\
    And the quaint mazes in the wanton green,\
    For lack of tread, are undistinguishable.\
    The human mortals want their winter here;\
    No night is now with hymn or carol blest;\
    Therefore the moon, the governess of floods,\
    Pale in her anger, washes all the air,\
    That rheumatic diseases do abound.\
    And thorough this distemperature we see\
    The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts\
    Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose;\
    And on old Hiems' thin and icy crown\
    An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds\
    Is, as in mockery, set. The spring, the summer, \
    The childing autumn, angry winter, change\
    Their wonted liveries; and the mazed world,\
    By their increase, now knows not which is which.\
    And this same progeny of evils comes\
    From our debate, from our dissension;\
    We are their parents and original.\
  OBERON. Do you amend it, then; it lies in you.\
    Why should Titania cross her Oberon?\
    I do but beg a little changeling boy\
    To be my henchman.\
  TITANIA. Set your heart at rest;\
    The fairy land buys not the child of me.\
    His mother was a vot'ress of my order;\
    And, in the spiced Indian air, by night,\
    Full often hath she gossip'd by my side;\
    And sat with me on Neptune's yellow sands,\
    Marking th' embarked traders on the flood;\
    When we have laugh'd to see the sails conceive,\
    And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind;\
    Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait \
    Following- her womb then rich with my young squire-\
    Would imitate, and sail upon the land,\
    To fetch me trifles, and return again,\
    As from a voyage, rich with merchandise.\
    But she, being mortal, of that boy did die;\
    And for her sake do I rear up her boy;\
    And for her sake I will not part with him.\
  OBERON. How long within this wood intend you stay?\
  TITANIA. Perchance till after Theseus' wedding-day.\
    If you will patiently dance in our round,\
    And see our moonlight revels, go with us;\
    If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts.\
  OBERON. Give me that boy and I will go with thee.\
  TITANIA. Not for thy fairy kingdom. Fairies, away.\
    We shall chide downright if I longer stay.\
                                     Exit TITANIA with her train\
  OBERON. Well, go thy way; thou shalt not from this grove\
    Till I torment thee for this injury.\
    My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou rememb'rest\
    Since once I sat upon a promontory, \
    And heard a mermaid on a dolphin's back\
    Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath\
    That the rude sea grew civil at her song,\
    And certain stars shot madly from their spheres\
    To hear the sea-maid's music.\
  PUCK. I remember.\
  OBERON. That very time I saw, but thou couldst not,\
    Flying between the cold moon and the earth\
    Cupid, all arm'd; a certain aim he took\
    At a fair vestal, throned by the west,\
    And loos'd his love-shaft smartly from his bow,\
    As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts;\
    But I might see young Cupid's fiery shaft\
    Quench'd in the chaste beams of the wat'ry moon;\
    And the imperial vot'ress passed on,\
    In maiden meditation, fancy-free.\
    Yet mark'd I where the bolt of Cupid fell.\
    It fell upon a little western flower,\
    Before milk-white, now purple with love's wound,\
    And maidens call it Love-in-idleness. \
    Fetch me that flow'r, the herb I showed thee once.\
    The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid\
    Will make or man or woman madly dote\
    Upon the next live creature that it sees.\
    Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again\
    Ere the leviathan can swim a league.\
  PUCK. I'll put a girdle round about the earth\
    In forty minutes.                                  Exit PUCK\
  OBERON. Having once this juice,\
    I'll watch Titania when she is asleep,\
    And drop the liquor of it in her eyes;\
    The next thing then she waking looks upon,\
    Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull,\
    On meddling monkey, or on busy ape,\
    She shall pursue it with the soul of love.\
    And ere I take this charm from off her sight,\
    As I can take it with another herb,\
    I'll make her render up her page to me.\
    But who comes here? I am invisible;\
    And I will overhear their conference. \
\
               Enter DEMETRIUS, HELENA following him\
\
  DEMETRIUS. I love thee not, therefore pursue me not.\
    Where is Lysander and fair Hermia?\
    The one I'll slay, the other slayeth me.\
    Thou told'st me they were stol'n unto this wood,\
    And here am I, and wood within this wood,\
    Because I cannot meet my Hermia.\
    Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.\
  HELENA. You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant;\
    But yet you draw not iron, for my heart\
    Is true as steel. Leave you your power to draw,\
    And I shall have no power to follow you.\
  DEMETRIUS. Do I entice you? Do I speak you fair?\
    Or, rather, do I not in plainest truth\
    Tell you I do not nor I cannot love you?\
  HELENA. And even for that do I love you the more.\
    I am your spaniel; and, Demetrius,\
    The more you beat me, I will fawn on you. \
    Use me but as your spaniel, spurn me, strike me,\
    Neglect me, lose me; only give me leave,\
    Unworthy as I am, to follow you.\
    What worser place can I beg in your love,\
    And yet a place of high respect with me,\
    Than to be used as you use your dog?\
  DEMETRIUS. Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit;\
    For I am sick when I do look on thee.\
  HELENA. And I am sick when I look not on you.\
  DEMETRIUS. You do impeach your modesty too much\
    To leave the city and commit yourself\
    Into the hands of one that loves you not;\
    To trust the opportunity of night,\
    And the ill counsel of a desert place,\
    With the rich worth of your virginity.\
  HELENA. Your virtue is my privilege for that:\
    It is not night when I do see your face,\
    Therefore I think I am not in the night;\
    Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company,\
    For you, in my respect, are all the world. \
    Then how can it be said I am alone\
    When all the world is here to look on me?\
  DEMETRIUS. I'll run from thee and hide me in the brakes,\
    And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.\
  HELENA. The wildest hath not such a heart as you.\
    Run when you will; the story shall be chang'd:\
    Apollo flies, and Daphne holds the chase;\
    The dove pursues the griffin; the mild hind\
    Makes speed to catch the tiger- bootless speed,\
    When cowardice pursues and valour flies.\
  DEMETRIUS. I will not stay thy questions; let me go;\
    Or, if thou follow me, do not believe\
    But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.\
  HELENA. Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field,\
    You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius!\
    Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex.\
    We cannot fight for love as men may do;\
    We should be woo'd, and were not made to woo.\
                                                  Exit DEMETRIUS\
    I'll follow thee, and make a heaven of hell, \
    To die upon the hand I love so well.             Exit HELENA\
  OBERON. Fare thee well, nymph; ere he do leave this grove,\
    Thou shalt fly him, and he shall seek thy love.\
\
                            Re-enter PUCK\
\
    Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.\
  PUCK. Ay, there it is.\
  OBERON. I pray thee give it me.\
    I know a bank where the wild thyme blows,\
    Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,\
    Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine,\
    With sweet musk-roses, and with eglantine;\
    There sleeps Titania sometime of the night,\
    Lull'd in these flowers with dances and delight;\
    And there the snake throws her enamell'd skin,\
    Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in;\
    And with the juice of this I'll streak her eyes,\
    And make her full of hateful fantasies.\
    Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove: \
    A sweet Athenian lady is in love\
    With a disdainful youth; anoint his eyes;\
    But do it when the next thing he espies\
    May be the lady. Thou shalt know the man\
    By the Athenian garments he hath on.\
    Effect it with some care, that he may prove\
    More fond on her than she upon her love.\
    And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.\
  PUCK. Fear not, my lord; your servant shall do so.      Exeunt\
\
\
\
\
SCENE II.\
Another part of the wood\
\
Enter TITANIA, with her train\
\
  TITANIA. Come now, a roundel and a fairy song;\
    Then, for the third part of a minute, hence:\
    Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds;\
    Some war with rere-mice for their leathern wings,\
    To make my small elves coats; and some keep back\
    The clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders\
    At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep;\
    Then to your offices, and let me rest.\
\
                          The FAIRIES Sing\
\
  FIRST FAIRY. You spotted snakes with double tongue,\
               Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen;\
               Newts and blind-worms, do no wrong,\
               Come not near our fairy Queen.\
  CHORUS.      Philomel with melody\
               Sing in our sweet lullaby. \
               Lulla, lulla, lullaby; lulla, lulla, lullaby.\
               Never harm\
               Nor spell nor charm\
               Come our lovely lady nigh.\
               So good night, with lullaby.\
  SECOND FAIRY.  Weaving spiders, come not here;\
                 Hence, you long-legg'd spinners, hence.\
                 Beetles black, approach not near;\
                 Worm nor snail do no offence.\
  CHORUS.      Philomel with melody, etc.       [TITANIA Sleeps]\
  FIRST FAIRY. Hence away; now all is well.\
               One aloof stand sentinel.          Exeunt FAIRIES\
\
      Enter OBERON and squeezes the flower on TITANIA'S eyelids\
\
  OBERON. What thou seest when thou dost wake,\
    Do it for thy true-love take;\
    Love and languish for his sake.\
    Be it ounce, or cat, or bear,\
    Pard, or boar with bristled hair, \
    In thy eye that shall appear\
    When thou wak'st, it is thy dear.\
    Wake when some vile thing is near.                      Exit\
\
                     Enter LYSANDER and HERMIA\
\
  LYSANDER. Fair love, you faint with wand'ring in the wood;\
    And, to speak troth, I have forgot our way;\
    We'll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good,\
    And tarry for the comfort of the day.\
  HERMIA. Be it so, Lysander: find you out a bed,\
    For I upon this bank will rest my head.\
  LYSANDER. One turf shall serve as pillow for us both;\
    One heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth.\
  HERMIA. Nay, good Lysander; for my sake, my dear,\
    Lie further off yet; do not lie so near.\
  LYSANDER. O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence!\
    Love takes the meaning in love's conference.\
    I mean that my heart unto yours is knit,\
    So that but one heart we can make of it; \
    Two bosoms interchained with an oath,\
    So then two bosoms and a single troth.\
    Then by your side no bed-room me deny,\
    For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie.\
  HERMIA. Lysander riddles very prettily.\
    Now much beshrew my manners and my pride,\
    If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied!\
    But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy\
    Lie further off, in human modesty;\
    Such separation as may well be said\
    Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid,\
    So far be distant; and good night, sweet friend.\
    Thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end!\
  LYSANDER. Amen, amen, to that fair prayer say I;\
    And then end life when I end loyalty!\
    Here is my bed; sleep give thee all his rest!\
  HERMIA. With half that wish the wisher's eyes be press'd!\
                                                    [They sleep]\
\
                          Enter PUCK \
\
  PUCK.      Through the forest have I gone,\
             But Athenian found I none\
             On whose eyes I might approve\
             This flower's force in stirring love.\
             Night and silence- Who is here?\
             Weeds of Athens he doth wear:\
             This is he, my master said,\
             Despised the Athenian maid;\
             And here the maiden, sleeping sound,\
             On the dank and dirty ground.\
             Pretty soul! she durst not lie\
             Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy.\
             Churl, upon thy eyes I throw\
             All the power this charm doth owe:\
             When thou wak'st let love forbid\
             Sleep his seat on thy eyelid.\
             So awake when I am gone;\
             For I must now to Oberon.                      Exit\
 \
               Enter DEMETRIUS and HELENA, running\
\
  HELENA. Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius.\
  DEMETRIUS. I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.\
  HELENA. O, wilt thou darkling leave me? Do not so.\
  DEMETRIUS. Stay on thy peril; I alone will go.            Exit\
  HELENA. O, I am out of breath in this fond chase!\
    The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace.\
    Happy is Hermia, wheresoe'er she lies,\
    For she hath blessed and attractive eyes.\
    How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears;\
    If so, my eyes are oft'ner wash'd than hers.\
    No, no, I am as ugly as a bear,\
    For beasts that meet me run away for fear;\
    Therefore no marvel though Demetrius\
    Do, as a monster, fly my presence thus.\
    What wicked and dissembling glass of mine\
    Made me compare with Hermia's sphery eyne?\
    But who is here? Lysander! on the ground!\
    Dead, or asleep? I see no blood, no wound. \
    Lysander, if you live, good sir, awake.\
  LYSANDER. [Waking] And run through fire I will for thy sweet\
sake.\
    Transparent Helena! Nature shows art,\
    That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart.\
    Where is Demetrius? O, how fit a word\
    Is that vile name to perish on my sword!\
  HELENA. Do not say so, Lysander; say not so.\
    What though he love your Hermia? Lord, what though?\
    Yet Hermia still loves you; then be content.\
  LYSANDER. Content with Hermia! No: I do repent\
    The tedious minutes I with her have spent.\
    Not Hermia but Helena I love:\
    Who will not change a raven for a dove?\
    The will of man is by his reason sway'd,\
    And reason says you are the worthier maid.\
    Things growing are not ripe until their season;\
    So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason;\
    And touching now the point of human skill,\
    Reason becomes the marshal to my will,\
    And leads me to your eyes, where I o'erlook \
    Love's stories, written in Love's richest book.\
  HELENA. Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born?\
    When at your hands did I deserve this scorn?\
    Is't not enough, is't not enough, young man,\
    That I did never, no, nor never can,\
    Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius' eye,\
    But you must flout my insufficiency?\
    Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do,\
    In such disdainful manner me to woo.\
    But fare you well; perforce I must confess\
    I thought you lord of more true gentleness.\
    O, that a lady of one man refus'd\
    Should of another therefore be abus'd!                  Exit\
  LYSANDER. She sees not Hermia. Hermia, sleep thou there;\
    And never mayst thou come Lysander near!\
    For, as a surfeit of the sweetest things\
    The deepest loathing to the stomach brings,\
    Or as the heresies that men do leave\
    Are hated most of those they did deceive,\
    So thou, my surfeit and my heresy, \
    Of all be hated, but the most of me!\
    And, all my powers, address your love and might\
    To honour Helen, and to be her knight!                  Exit\
  HERMIA. [Starting] Help me, Lysander, help me; do thy best\
    To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast.\
    Ay me, for pity! What a dream was here!\
    Lysander, look how I do quake with fear.\
    Methought a serpent eat my heart away,\
    And you sat smiling at his cruel prey.\
    Lysander! What, remov'd? Lysander! lord!\
    What, out of hearing gone? No sound, no word?\
    Alack, where are you? Speak, an if you hear;\
    Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear.\
    No? Then I well perceive you are not nigh.\
    Either death or you I'll find immediately.              Exit\
\
\
\
\
<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM\
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS\
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY\
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE\
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS\
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED\
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY\
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>\
\
\
\
ACT III. SCENE I.\
The wood. TITANIA lying asleep\
\
Enter QUINCE, SNUG, BOTTOM, FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING\
\
  BOTTOM. Are we all met?\
  QUINCE. Pat, pat; and here's a marvellous convenient place for\
our\
    rehearsal. This green plot shall be our stage, this hawthorn\
    brake our tiring-house; and we will do it in action, as we\
will\
    do it before the Duke.\
  BOTTOM. Peter Quince!\
  QUINCE. What sayest thou, bully Bottom?\
  BOTTOM. There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisby\
that\
    will never please. First, Pyramus must draw a sword to kill\
    himself; which the ladies cannot abide. How answer you that?\
  SNOUT. By'r lakin, a parlous fear.\
  STARVELING. I believe we must leave the killing out, when all\
is\
    done.\
  BOTTOM. Not a whit; I have a device to make all well. Write me\
a\
    prologue; and let the prologue seem to say we will do no harm\
    with our swords, and that Pyramus is not kill'd indeed; and\
for \
    the more better assurance, tell them that I Pyramus am not\
    Pyramus but Bottom the weaver. This will put them out of\
fear.\
  QUINCE. Well, we will have such a prologue; and it shall be\
written\
    in eight and six.\
  BOTTOM. No, make it two more; let it be written in eight and\
eight.\
  SNOUT. Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?\
  STARVELING. I fear it, I promise you.\
  BOTTOM. Masters, you ought to consider with yourself to bring\
in-\
    God shield us!- a lion among ladies is a most dreadful thing;\
for\
    there is not a more fearful wild-fowl than your lion living;\
and\
    we ought to look to't.\
  SNOUT. Therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion.\
  BOTTOM. Nay, you must name his name, and half his face must be\
seen\
    through the lion's neck; and he himself must speak through,\
    saying thus, or to the same defect: 'Ladies,' or 'Fair\
ladies, I\
    would wish you' or 'I would request you' or 'I would entreat\
you\
    not to fear, not to tremble. My life for yours! If you think\
I\
    come hither as a lion, it were pity of my life. No, I am no\
such\
    thing; I am a man as other men are.' And there, indeed, let\
him\
    name his name, and tell them plainly he is Snug the joiner. \
  QUINCE. Well, it shall be so. But there is two hard things-\
that\
    is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber; for, you know,\
Pyramus\
    and Thisby meet by moonlight.\
  SNOUT. Doth the moon shine that night we play our play?\
  BOTTOM. A calendar, a calendar! Look in the almanack; find out\
    moonshine, find out moonshine.\
  QUINCE. Yes, it doth shine that night.\
  BOTTOM. Why, then may you leave a casement of the great chamber\
    window, where we play, open; and the moon may shine in at the\
    casement.\
  QUINCE. Ay; or else one must come in with a bush of thorns and\
a\
    lantern, and say he comes to disfigure or to present the\
person\
    of Moonshine. Then there is another thing: we must have a\
wall in\
    the great chamber; for Pyramus and Thisby, says the story,\
did\
    talk through the chink of a wall.\
  SNOUT. You can never bring in a wall. What say you, Bottom?\
  BOTTOM. Some man or other must present Wall; and let him have\
some\
    plaster, or some loam, or some rough-cast about him, to\
signify\
    wall; and let him hold his fingers thus, and through that\
cranny\
    shall Pyramus and Thisby whisper. \
  QUINCE. If that may be, then all is well. Come, sit down, every\
    mother's son, and rehearse your parts. Pyramus, you begin;\
when\
    you have spoken your speech, enter into that brake; and so\
every\
    one according to his cue.\
\
                          Enter PUCK behind\
\
  PUCK. What hempen homespuns have we swagg'ring here,\
    So near the cradle of the Fairy Queen?\
    What, a play toward! I'll be an auditor;\
    An actor too perhaps, if I see cause.\
  QUINCE. Speak, Pyramus. Thisby, stand forth.\
  BOTTOM. Thisby, the flowers of odious savours sweet-\
  QUINCE. 'Odious'- odorous!\
  BOTTOM. -odours savours sweet;\
    So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisby dear.\
    But hark, a voice! Stay thou but here awhile,\
    And by and by I will to thee appear.                    Exit\
  PUCK. A stranger Pyramus than e'er played here!           Exit\
  FLUTE. Must I speak now? \
  QUINCE. Ay, marry, must you; for you must understand he goes\
but to\
    see a noise that he heard, and is to come again.\
  FLUTE. Most radiant Pyramus, most lily-white of hue,\
    Of colour like the red rose on triumphant brier,\
    Most brisky juvenal, and eke most lovely Jew,\
    As true as truest horse, that would never tire,\
    I'll meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny's tomb.\
  QUINCE. 'Ninus' tomb,' man! Why, you must not speak that yet;\
that\
    you answer to Pyramus. You speak all your part at once, cues,\
and\
    all. Pyramus enter: your cue is past; it is 'never tire.'\
  FLUTE. O- As true as truest horse, that y et would never tire.\
\
            Re-enter PUCK, and BOTTOM with an ass's head\
\
  BOTTOM. If I were fair, Thisby, I were only thine.\
  QUINCE. O monstrous! O strange! We are haunted. Pray, masters!\
fly,\
    masters! Help!\
                                  Exeunt all but BOTTOM and PUCK\
  PUCK. I'll follow you; I'll lead you about a round,\
    Through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier; \
    Sometime a horse I'll be, sometime a hound,\
    A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire;\
    And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn,\
    Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.\
Exit\
  BOTTOM. Why do they run away? This is a knavery of them to make\
me\
    afeard.\
\
                          Re-enter SNOUT\
\
  SNOUT. O Bottom, thou art chang'd! What do I see on thee?\
  BOTTOM. What do you see? You see an ass-head of your own, do\
you?\
                                                      Exit SNOUT\
\
                          Re-enter QUINCE\
\
  QUINCE. Bless thee, Bottom, bless thee! Thou art translated.\
 Exit\
  BOTTOM. I see their knavery: this is to make an ass of me; to\
    fright me, if they could. But I will not stir from this\
place, do \
    what they can; I will walk up and down here, and will sing,\
that\
    they shall hear I am not afraid.                     [Sings]\
\
          The ousel cock, so black of hue,\
            With orange-tawny bill,\
          The throstle with his note so true,\
            The wren with little quill.\
\
  TITANIA. What angel wakes me from my flow'ry bed?\
  BOTTOM. [Sings]\
          The finch, the sparrow, and the lark,\
            The plain-song cuckoo grey,\
          Whose note full many a man doth mark,\
            And dares not answer nay-\
    for, indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a bird?\
    Who would give a bird the he, though he cry 'cuckoo' never\
so?\
  TITANIA. I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again.\
    Mine ear is much enamoured of thy note;\
    So is mine eye enthralled to thy shape;\
    And thy fair virtue's force perforce doth move me, \
    On the first view, to say, to swear, I love thee.\
  BOTTOM. Methinks, mistress, you should have little reason for\
that.\
    And yet, to say the truth, reason and love keep little\
company\
    together now-a-days. The more the pity that some honest\
    neighbours will not make them friends. Nay, I can gleek upon\
    occasion.\
  TITANIA. Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.\
  BOTTOM. Not so, neither; but if I had wit enough to get out of\
this\
    wood, I have enough to serve mine own turn.\
  TITANIA. Out of this wood do not desire to go;\
    Thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no.\
    I am a spirit of no common rate;\
    The summer still doth tend upon my state;\
    And I do love thee; therefore, go with me.\
    I'll give thee fairies to attend on thee;\
    And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep,\
    And sing, while thou on pressed flowers dost sleep;\
    And I will purge thy mortal grossness so\
    That thou shalt like an airy spirit go.\
    Peaseblossom! Cobweb! Moth! and Mustardseed! \
\
       Enter PEASEBLOSSOM, COBWEB, MOTH, and MUSTARDSEED\
\
  PEASEBLOSSOM. Ready.\
  COBWEB. And I.\
  MOTH. And I.\
  MUSTARDSEED. And I.\
  ALL. Where shall we go?\
  TITANIA. Be kind and courteous to this gentleman;\
    Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes;\
    Feed him with apricocks and dewberries,\
    With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries;\
    The honey bags steal from the humble-bees,\
    And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs,\
    And light them at the fiery glow-worm's eyes,\
    To have my love to bed and to arise;\
    And pluck the wings from painted butterflies,\
    To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes.\
    Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.\
  PEASEBLOSSOM. Hail, mortal! \
  COBWEB. Hail!\
  MOTH. Hail!\
  MUSTARDSEED. Hail!\
  BOTTOM. I cry your worships mercy, heartily; I beseech your\
    worship's name.\
  COBWEB. Cobweb.\
  BOTTOM. I shall desire you of more acquaintance, good Master\
    Cobweb. If I cut my finger, I shall make bold with you. Your\
    name, honest gentleman?\
  PEASEBLOSSOM. Peaseblossom.\
  BOTTOM. I pray you, commend me to Mistress Squash, your mother,\
and\
    to Master Peascod, your father. Good Master Peaseblossom, I\
shall\
    desire you of more acquaintance too. Your name, I beseech\
you,\
    sir?\
  MUSTARDSEED. Mustardseed.\
  BOTTOM. Good Master Mustardseed, I know your patience well.\
That\
    same cowardly giant-like ox-beef hath devour'd many a\
gentleman\
    of your house. I promise you your kindred hath made my eyes\
water\
    ere now. I desire you of more acquaintance, good Master\
    Mustardseed. \
  TITANIA. Come, wait upon him; lead him to my bower.\
    The moon, methinks, looks with a wat'ry eye;\
    And when she weeps, weeps every little flower;\
    Lamenting some enforced chastity.\
    Tie up my love's tongue, bring him silently.          Exeunt\
\
\
\
\
SCENE II.\
Another part of the wood\
\
Enter OBERON\
\
  OBERON. I wonder if Titania be awak'd;\
    Then, what it was that next came in her eye,\
    Which she must dote on in extremity.\
\
                          Enter PUCK\
\
    Here comes my messenger. How now, mad spirit!\
    What night-rule now about this haunted grove?\
  PUCK. My mistress with a monster is in love.\
    Near to her close and consecrated bower,\
    While she was in her dull and sleeping hour,\
    A crew of patches, rude mechanicals,\
    That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,\
    Were met together to rehearse a play\
    Intended for great Theseus' nuptial day.\
    The shallowest thickskin of that barren sort,\
    Who Pyramus presented, in their sport\
    Forsook his scene and ent'red in a brake; \
    When I did him at this advantage take,\
    An ass's nole I fixed on his head.\
    Anon his Thisby must be answered,\
    And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy,\
    As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,\
    Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort,\
    Rising and cawing at the gun's report,\
    Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky,\
    So at his sight away his fellows fly;\
    And at our stamp here, o'er and o'er one falls;\
    He murder cries, and help from Athens calls.\
    Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus strong,\
    Made senseless things begin to do them wrong,\
    For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch;\
    Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all things catch.\
    I led them on in this distracted fear,\
    And left sweet Pyramus translated there;\
    When in that moment, so it came to pass,\
    Titania wak'd, and straightway lov'd an ass.\
  OBERON. This falls out better than I could devise. \
    But hast thou yet latch'd the Athenian's eyes\
    With the love-juice, as I did bid thee do?\
  PUCK. I took him sleeping- that is finish'd too-\
    And the Athenian woman by his side;\
    That, when he wak'd, of force she must be ey'd.\
\
                 Enter DEMETRIUS and HERMIA\
\
  OBERON. Stand close; this is the same Athenian.\
  PUCK. This is the woman, but not this the man.\
  DEMETRIUS. O, why rebuke you him that loves you so?\
    Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe.\
  HERMIA. Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse,\
    For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse.\
    If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep,\
    Being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep,\
    And kill me too.\
    The sun was not so true unto the day\
    As he to me. Would he have stolen away\
    From sleeping Hermia? I'll believe as soon \
    This whole earth may be bor'd, and that the moon\
    May through the centre creep and so displease\
    Her brother's noontide with th' Antipodes.\
    It cannot be but thou hast murd'red him;\
    So should a murderer look- so dead, so grim.\
  DEMETRIUS. So should the murdered look; and so should I,\
    Pierc'd through the heart with your stern cruelty;\
    Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear,\
    As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere.\
  HERMIA. What's this to my Lysander? Where is he?\
    Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?\
  DEMETRIUS. I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.\
  HERMIA. Out, dog! out, cur! Thou driv'st me past the bounds\
    Of maiden's patience. Hast thou slain him, then?\
    Henceforth be never numb'red among men!\
    O, once tell true; tell true, even for my sake!\
    Durst thou have look'd upon him being awake,\
    And hast thou kill'd him sleeping? O brave touch!\
    Could not a worm, an adder, do so much?\
    An adder did it; for with doubler tongue \
    Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.\
  DEMETRIUS. You spend your passion on a mispris'd mood:\
    I am not guilty of Lysander's blood;\
    Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell.\
  HERMIA. I pray thee, tell me then that he is well.\
  DEMETRIUS. An if I could, what should I get therefore?\
  HERMIA. A privilege never to see me more.\
    And from thy hated presence part I so;\
    See me no more whether he be dead or no.                Exit\
  DEMETRIUS. There is no following her in this fierce vein;\
    Here, therefore, for a while I will remain.\
    So sorrow's heaviness doth heavier grow\
    For debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe;\
    Which now in some slight measure it will pay,\
    If for his tender here I make some stay.         [Lies down]\
  OBERON. What hast thou done? Thou hast mistaken quite,\
    And laid the love-juice on some true-love's sight.\
    Of thy misprision must perforce ensue\
    Some true love turn'd, and not a false turn'd true.\
  PUCK. Then fate o'er-rules, that, one man holding troth, \
    A million fail, confounding oath on oath.\
  OBERON. About the wood go swifter than the wind,\
    And Helena of Athens look thou find;\
    All fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer,\
    With sighs of love that costs the fresh blood dear.\
    By some illusion see thou bring her here;\
    I'll charm his eyes against she do appear.\
  PUCK. I go, I go; look how I go,\
    Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow.               Exit\
  OBERON.       Flower of this purple dye,\
                Hit with Cupid's archery,\
                Sink in apple of his eye.\
                When his love he doth espy,\
                Let her shine as gloriously\
                As the Venus of the sky.\
                When thou wak'st, if she be by,\
                Beg of her for remedy.\
\
                       Re-enter PUCK\
 \
  PUCK.         Captain of our fairy band,\
                Helena is here at hand,\
                And the youth mistook by me\
                Pleading for a lover's fee;\
                Shall we their fond pageant see?\
                Lord, what fools these mortals be!\
  OBERON.       Stand aside. The noise they make\
                Will cause Demetrius to awake.\
  PUCK.         Then will two at once woo one.\
                That must needs be sport alone;\
                And those things do best please me\
                That befall prepost'rously.\
\
                   Enter LYSANDER and HELENA\
\
  LYSANDER. Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?\
    Scorn and derision never come in tears.\
    Look when I vow, I weep; and vows so born,\
    In their nativity all truth appears.\
    How can these things in me seem scorn to you, \
    Bearing the badge of faith, to prove them true?\
  HELENA. You do advance your cunning more and more.\
    When truth kills truth, O devilish-holy fray!\
    These vows are Hermia's. Will you give her o'er?\
    Weigh oath with oath, and you will nothing weigh:\
    Your vows to her and me, put in two scales,\
    Will even weigh; and both as light as tales.\
  LYSANDER. I hod no judgment when to her I swore.\
  HELENA. Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o'er.\
  LYSANDER. Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.\
  DEMETRIUS. [Awaking] O Helen, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine!\
    To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne?\
    Crystal is muddy. O, how ripe in show\
    Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow!\
    That pure congealed white, high Taurus' snow,\
    Fann'd with the eastern wind, turns to a crow\
    When thou hold'st up thy hand. O, let me kiss\
    This princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!\
  HELENA. O spite! O hell! I see you all are bent\
    To set against me for your merriment. \
    If you were civil and knew courtesy,\
    You would not do me thus much injury.\
    Can you not hate me, as I know you do,\
    But you must join in souls to mock me too?\
    If you were men, as men you are in show,\
    You would not use a gentle lady so:\
    To vow, and swear, and superpraise my parts,\
    When I am sure you hate me with your hearts.\
    You both are rivals, and love Hermia;\
    And now both rivals, to mock Helena.\
    A trim exploit, a manly enterprise,\
    To conjure tears up in a poor maid's eyes\
    With your derision! None of noble sort\
    Would so offend a virgin, and extort\
    A poor soul's patience, all to make you sport.\
  LYSANDER. You are unkind, Demetrius; be not so;\
    For you love Hermia. This you know I know;\
    And here, with all good will, with all my heart,\
    In Hermia's love I yield you up my part;\
    And yours of Helena to me bequeath, \
    Whom I do love and will do till my death.\
  HELENA. Never did mockers waste more idle breath.\
  DEMETRIUS. Lysander, keep thy Hermia; I will none.\
    If e'er I lov'd her, all that love is gone.\
    My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourn'd,\
    And now to Helen is it home return'd,\
    There to remain.\
  LYSANDER. Helen, it is not so.\
  DEMETRIUS. Disparage not the faith thou dost not know,\
    Lest, to thy peril, thou aby it dear.\
    Look where thy love comes; yonder is thy dear.\
\
                       Enter HERMIA\
\
  HERMIA. Dark night, that from the eye his function takes,\
    The ear more quick of apprehension makes;\
    Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense,\
    It pays the hearing double recompense.\
    Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found;\
    Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound. \
    But why unkindly didst thou leave me so?\
  LYSANDER. Why should he stay whom love doth press to go?\
  HERMIA. What love could press Lysander from my side?\
  LYSANDER. Lysander's love, that would not let him bide-\
    Fair Helena, who more engilds the night\
    Than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light.\
    Why seek'st thou me? Could not this make thee know\
    The hate I bare thee made me leave thee so?\
  HERMIA. You speak not as you think; it cannot be.\
  HELENA. Lo, she is one of this confederacy!\
    Now I perceive they have conjoin'd all three\
    To fashion this false sport in spite of me.\
    Injurious Hermia! most ungrateful maid!\
    Have you conspir'd, have you with these contriv'd,\
    To bait me with this foul derision?\
    Is all the counsel that we two have shar'd,\
    The sisters' vows, the hours that we have spent,\
    When we have chid the hasty-footed time\
    For parting us- O, is all forgot?\
    All school-days' friendship, childhood innocence? \
    We, Hermia, like two artificial gods,\
    Have with our needles created both one flower,\
    Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,\
    Both warbling of one song, both in one key;\
    As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds,\
    Had been incorporate. So we grew together,\
    Like to a double cherry, seeming parted,\
    But yet an union in partition,\
    Two lovely berries moulded on one stern;\
    So, with two seeming bodies, but one heart;\
    Two of the first, like coats in heraldry,\
    Due but to one, and crowned with one crest.\
    And will you rent our ancient love asunder,\
    To join with men in scorning your poor friend?\
    It is not friendly, 'tis not maidenly;\
    Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it,\
    Though I alone do feel the injury.\
  HERMIA. I am amazed at your passionate words;\
    I scorn you not; it seems that you scorn me.\
  HELENA. Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn, \
    To follow me and praise my eyes and face?\
    And made your other love, Demetrius,\
    Who even but now did spurn me with his foot,\
    To call me goddess, nymph, divine, and rare,\
    Precious, celestial? Wherefore speaks he this\
    To her he hates? And wherefore doth Lysander\
    Deny your love, so rich within his soul,\
    And tender me, forsooth, affection,\
    But by your setting on, by your consent?\
    What though I be not so in grace as you,\
    So hung upon with love, so fortunate,\
    But miserable most, to love unlov'd?\
    This you should pity rather than despise.\
  HERMIA. I understand not what you mean by this.\
  HELENA. Ay, do- persever, counterfeit sad looks,\
    Make mouths upon me when I turn my back,\
    Wink each at other; hold the sweet jest up;\
    This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled.\
    If you have any pity, grace, or manners,\
    You would not make me such an argument. \
    But fare ye well; 'tis partly my own fault,\
    Which death, or absence, soon shall remedy.\
  LYSANDER. Stay, gentle Helena; hear my excuse;\
    My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena!\
  HELENA. O excellent!\
  HERMIA. Sweet, do not scorn her so.\
  DEMETRIUS. If she cannot entreat, I can compel.\
  LYSANDER. Thou canst compel no more than she entreat;\
    Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers\
    Helen, I love thee, by my life I do;\
    I swear by that which I will lose for thee\
    To prove him false that says I love thee not.\
  DEMETRIUS. I say I love thee more than he can do.\
  LYSANDER. If thou say so, withdraw, and prove it too.\
  DEMETRIUS. Quick, come.\
  HERMIA. Lysander, whereto tends all this?\
  LYSANDER. Away, you Ethiope!\
  DEMETRIUS. No, no, he will\
    Seem to break loose- take on as you would follow,\
    But yet come not. You are a tame man; go! \
  LYSANDER. Hang off, thou cat, thou burr; vile thing, let loose,\
    Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent.\
  HERMIA. Why are you grown so rude? What change is this,\
    Sweet love?\
  LYSANDER. Thy love! Out, tawny Tartar, out!\
    Out, loathed med'cine! O hated potion, hence!\
  HERMIA. Do you not jest?\
  HELENA. Yes, sooth; and so do you.\
  LYSANDER. Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.\
  DEMETRIUS. I would I had your bond; for I perceive\
    A weak bond holds you; I'll not trust your word.\
  LYSANDER. What, should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead?\
    Although I hate her, I'll not harm her so.\
  HERMIA. What! Can you do me greater harm than hate?\
    Hate me! wherefore? O me! what news, my love?\
    Am not I Hermia? Are not you Lysander?\
    I am as fair now as I was erewhile.\
    Since night you lov'd me; yet since night you left me.\
    Why then, you left me- O, the gods forbid!-\
    In earnest, shall I say? \
  LYSANDER. Ay, by my life!\
    And never did desire to see thee more.\
    Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt;\
    Be certain, nothing truer; 'tis no jest\
    That I do hate thee and love Helena.\
  HERMIA. O me! you juggler! you cankerblossom!\
    You thief of love! What! Have you come by night,\
    And stol'n my love's heart from him?\
  HELENA. Fine, i' faith!\
    Have you no modesty, no maiden shame,\
    No touch of bashfulness? What! Will you tear\
    Impatient answers from my gentle tongue?\
    Fie, fie! you counterfeit, you puppet you!\
  HERMIA. 'Puppet!' why so? Ay, that way goes the game.\
    Now I perceive that she hath made compare\
    Between our statures; she hath urg'd her height;\
    And with her personage, her tall personage,\
    Her height, forsooth, she hath prevail'd with him.\
    And are you grown so high in his esteem\
    Because I am so dwarfish and so low? \
    How low am I, thou painted maypole? Speak.\
    How low am I? I am not yet so low\
    But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.\
  HELENA. I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen,\
    Let her not hurt me. I was never curst;\
    I have no gift at all in shrewishness;\
    I am a right maid for my cowardice;\
    Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think,\
    Because she is something lower than myself,\
    That I can match her.\
  HERMIA. 'Lower' hark, again.\
  HELENA. Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me.\
    I evermore did love you, Hermia,\
    Did ever keep your counsels, never wrong'd you;\
    Save that, in love unto Demetrius,\
    I told him of your stealth unto this wood.\
    He followed you; for love I followed him;\
    But he hath chid me hence, and threat'ned me\
    To strike me, spurn me, nay, to kill me too;\
    And now, so you will let me quiet go, \
    To Athens will I bear my folly back,\
    And follow you no further. Let me go.\
    You see how simple and how fond I am.\
  HERMIA. Why, get you gone! Who is't that hinders you?\
  HELENA. A foolish heart that I leave here behind.\
  HERMIA. What! with Lysander?\
  HELENA. With Demetrius.\
  LYSANDER. Be not afraid; she shall not harm thee, Helena.\
  DEMETRIUS. No, sir, she shall not, though you take her part.\
  HELENA. O, when she is angry, she is keen and shrewd;\
    She was a vixen when she went to school;\
    And, though she be but little, she is fierce.\
  HERMIA. 'Little' again! Nothing but 'low' and 'little'!\
    Why will you suffer her to flout me thus?\
    Let me come to her.\
  LYSANDER. Get you gone, you dwarf;\
    You minimus, of hind'ring knot-grass made;\
    You bead, you acorn.\
  DEMETRIUS. You are too officious\
    In her behalf that scorns your services. \
    Let her alone; speak not of Helena;\
    Take not her part; for if thou dost intend\
    Never so little show of love to her,\
    Thou shalt aby it.\
  LYSANDER. Now she holds me not.\
    Now follow, if thou dar'st, to try whose right,\
    Of thine or mine, is most in Helena.\
  DEMETRIUS. Follow! Nay, I'll go with thee, cheek by jowl.\
                                   Exeunt LYSANDER and DEMETRIUS\
  HERMIA. You, mistress, all this coil is long of you.\
    Nay, go not back.\
  HELENA. I will not trust you, I;\
    Nor longer stay in your curst company.\
    Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray;\
    My legs are longer though, to run away.                 Exit\
  HERMIA. I am amaz'd, and know not what to say.            Exit\
  OBERON. This is thy negligence. Still thou mistak'st,\
    Or else committ'st thy knaveries wilfully.\
  PUCK. Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook.\
    Did not you tell me I should know the man \
    By the Athenian garments he had on?\
    And so far blameless proves my enterprise\
    That I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes;\
    And so far am I glad it so did sort,\
    As this their jangling I esteem a sport.\
  OBERON. Thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight.\
    Hie therefore, Robin, overcast the night;\
    The starry welkin cover thou anon\
    With drooping fog as black as Acheron,\
    And lead these testy rivals so astray\
    As one come not within another's way.\
    Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue,\
    Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong;\
    And sometime rail thou like Demetrius;\
    And from each other look thou lead them thus,\
    Till o'er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep\
    With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep.\
    Then crush this herb into Lysander's eye;\
    Whose liquor hath this virtuous property,\
    To take from thence all error with his might \
    And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight.\
    When they next wake, all this derision\
    Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision;\
    And back to Athens shall the lovers wend\
    With league whose date till death shall never end.\
    Whiles I in this affair do thee employ,\
    I'll to my queen, and beg her Indian boy;\
    And then I will her charmed eye release\
    From monster's view, and all things shall be peace.\
  PUCK. My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,\
    For night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast;\
    And yonder shines Aurora's harbinger,\
    At whose approach ghosts, wand'ring here and there,\
    Troop home to churchyards. Damned spirits all\
    That in cross-ways and floods have burial,\
    Already to their wormy beds are gone,\
    For fear lest day should look their shames upon;\
    They wilfully themselves exil'd from light,\
    And must for aye consort with black-brow'd night.\
  OBERON. But we are spirits of another sort: \
    I with the Morning's love have oft made sport;\
    And, like a forester, the groves may tread\
    Even till the eastern gate, all fiery red,\
    Opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams,\
    Turns into yellow gold his salt green streams.\
    But, notwithstanding, haste, make no delay;\
    We may effect this business yet ere day.         Exit OBERON\
  PUCK.      Up and down, up and down,\
             I will lead them up and down.\
             I am fear'd in field and town.\
             Goblin, lead them up and down.\
    Here comes one.\
\
                      Enter LYSANDER\
\
  LYSANDER. Where art thou, proud Demetrius? Speak thou now.\
  PUCK. Here, villain, drawn and ready. Where art thou?\
  LYSANDER. I will be with thee straight.\
  PUCK. Follow me, then,\
    To plainer ground.      Exit LYSANDER as following the voice \
\
                      Enter DEMETRIUS\
\
  DEMETRIUS. Lysander, speak again.\
    Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled?\
    Speak! In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy head?\
  PUCK. Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,\
    Telling the bushes that thou look'st for wars,\
    And wilt not come? Come, recreant, come, thou child;\
    I'll whip thee with a rod. He is defil'd\
    That draws a sword on thee.\
  DEMETRIUS. Yea, art thou there?\
  PUCK. Follow my voice; we'll try no manhood here.       Exeunt\
\
                      Re-enter LYSANDER\
\
  LYSANDER. He goes before me, and still dares me on;\
    When I come where he calls, then he is gone.\
    The villain is much lighter heel'd than I.\
    I followed fast, but faster he did fly, \
    That fallen am I in dark uneven way,\
    And here will rest me. [Lies down] Come, thou gentle day.\
    For if but once thou show me thy grey light,\
    I'll find Demetrius, and revenge this spite.        [Sleeps]\
\
                 Re-enter PUCK and DEMETRIUS\
\
  PUCK. Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why com'st thou not?\
  DEMETRIUS. Abide me, if thou dar'st; for well I wot\
    Thou run'st before me, shifting every place,\
    And dar'st not stand, nor look me in the face.\
    Where art thou now?\
  PUCK. Come hither; I am here.\
  DEMETRIUS. Nay, then, thou mock'st me. Thou shalt buy this\
dear,\
    If ever I thy face by daylight see;\
    Now, go thy way. Faintness constraineth me\
    To measure out my length on this cold bed.\
    By day's approach look to be visited.\
                                          [Lies down and sleeps]\
 \
                       Enter HELENA\
\
  HELENA. O weary night, O long and tedious night,\
    Abate thy hours! Shine comforts from the east,\
    That I may back to Athens by daylight,\
    From these that my poor company detest.\
    And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye,\
    Steal me awhile from mine own company.              [Sleeps]\
  PUCK.       Yet but three? Come one more;\
              Two of both kinds makes up four.\
              Here she comes, curst and sad.\
              Cupid is a knavish lad,\
              Thus to make poor females mad.\
\
                     Enter HERMIA\
\
  HERMIA. Never so weary, never so in woe,\
    Bedabbled with the dew, and torn with briers,\
    I can no further crawl, no further go;\
    My legs can keep no pace with my desires. \
    Here will I rest me till the break of day.\
    Heavens shield Lysander, if they mean a fray!\
                                          [Lies down and sleeps]\
  PUCK.          On the ground\
                 Sleep sound;\
                 I'll apply\
                 To your eye,\
          Gentle lover, remedy.\
                        [Squeezing the juice on LYSANDER'S eyes]\
                 When thou wak'st,\
                 Thou tak'st\
                 True delight\
                 In the sight\
          Of thy former lady's eye;\
          And the country proverb known,\
          That every man should take his own,\
          In your waking shall be shown:\
                 Jack shall have Jill;\
                 Nought shall go ill;\
    The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well. \
 Exit\
\
\
\
\
<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM\
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS\
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY\
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE\
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS\
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED\
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY\
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>\
\
\
\
ACT IV. SCENE I.\
The wood. LYSANDER, DEMETRIUS, HELENA, and HERMIA, lying asleep\
\
Enter TITANIA and Bottom; PEASEBLOSSOM, COBWEB, MOTH,\
MUSTARDSEED,\
and other FAIRIES attending;\
                      OBERON behind, unseen\
\
  TITANIA. Come, sit thee down upon this flow'ry bed,\
    While I thy amiable cheeks do coy,\
    And stick musk-roses in thy sleek smooth head,\
    And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy.\
  BOTTOM. Where's Peaseblossom?\
  PEASEBLOSSOM. Ready.\
  BOTTOM. Scratch my head, Peaseblossom.\
    Where's Mounsieur Cobweb?\
  COBWEB. Ready.\
  BOTTOM. Mounsieur Cobweb; good mounsieur, get you your weapons\
in\
    your hand and kill me a red-hipp'd humble-bee on the top of a\
    thistle; and, good mounsieur, bring me the honey-bag. Do not\
fret\
    yourself too much in the action, mounsieur; and, good\
mounsieur,\
    have a care the honey-bag break not; I would be loath to have\
you \
    overflown with a honey-bag, signior. Where's Mounsieur\
    Mustardseed?\
  MUSTARDSEED. Ready.\
  BOTTOM. Give me your neaf, Mounsieur Mustardseed. Pray you,\
leave\
    your curtsy, good mounsieur.\
  MUSTARDSEED. What's your will?\
  BOTTOM. Nothing, good mounsieur, but to help Cavalery Cobweb to\
    scratch. I must to the barber's, mounsieur; for methinks I am\
    marvellous hairy about the face; and I am such a tender ass,\
if\
    my hair do but tickle me I must scratch.\
  TITANIA. What, wilt thou hear some music, my sweet love?\
  BOTTOM. I have a reasonable good ear in music. Let's have the\
tongs\
    and the bones.\
  TITANIA. Or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat.\
  BOTTOM. Truly, a peck of provender; I could munch your good dry\
    oats. Methinks I have a great desire to a bottle of hay. Good\
    hay, sweet hay, hath no fellow.\
  TITANIA. I have a venturous fairy that shall seek\
    The squirrel's hoard, and fetch thee new nuts.\
  BOTTOM. I had rather have a handful or two of dried peas. But,\
I \
    pray you, let none of your people stir me; I have an\
exposition\
    of sleep come upon me.\
  TITANIA. Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms.\
    Fairies, be gone, and be all ways away.       Exeunt FAIRIES\
    So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle\
    Gently entwist; the female ivy so\
    Enrings the barky fingers of the elm.\
    O, how I love thee! how I dote on thee!         [They sleep]\
\
                         Enter PUCK\
\
  OBERON. [Advancing] Welcome, good Robin. Seest thou this sweet\
      sight?\
    Her dotage now I do begin to pity;\
    For, meeting her of late behind the wood,\
    Seeking sweet favours for this hateful fool,\
    I did upbraid her and fall out with her.\
    For she his hairy temples then had rounded\
    With coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers;\
    And that same dew which sometime on the buds \
    Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls\
    Stood now within the pretty flowerets' eyes,\
    Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail.\
    When I had at my pleasure taunted her,\
    And she in mild terms begg'd my patience,\
    I then did ask of her her changeling child;\
    Which straight she gave me, and her fairy sent\
    To bear him to my bower in fairy land.\
    And now I have the boy, I will undo\
    This hateful imperfection of her eyes.\
    And, gentle Puck, take this transformed scalp\
    From off the head of this Athenian swain,\
    That he awaking when the other do\
    May all to Athens back again repair,\
    And think no more of this night's accidents\
    But as the fierce vexation of a dream.\
    But first I will release the Fairy Queen.\
                                             [Touching her eyes]\
           Be as thou wast wont to be;\
           See as thou was wont to see. \
           Dian's bud o'er Cupid's flower\
           Hath such force and blessed power.\
    Now, my Titania; wake you, my sweet queen.\
  TITANIA. My Oberon! What visions have I seen!\
    Methought I was enamour'd of an ass.\
  OBERON. There lies your love.\
  TITANIA. How came these things to pass?\
    O, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now!\
  OBERON. Silence awhile. Robin, take off this head.\
    Titania, music call; and strike more dead\
    Than common sleep of all these five the sense.\
  TITANIA. Music, ho, music, such as charmeth sleep!\
  PUCK. Now when thou wak'st with thine own fool's eyes peep.\
  OBERON. Sound, music. Come, my Queen, take hands with me,\
                                                         [Music]\
    And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.\
    Now thou and I are new in amity,\
    And will to-morrow midnight solemnly\
    Dance in Duke Theseus' house triumphantly,\
    And bless it to all fair prosperity. \
    There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be\
    Wedded, with Theseus, an in jollity.\
  PUCK.       Fairy King, attend and mark;\
              I do hear the morning lark.\
  OBERON.     Then, my Queen, in silence sad,\
              Trip we after night's shade.\
              We the globe can compass soon,\
              Swifter than the wand'ring moon.\
  TITANIA.    Come, my lord; and in our flight,\
              Tell me how it came this night\
              That I sleeping here was found\
              With these mortals on the ground.           Exeunt\
\
        To the winding of horns, enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA,\
                      EGEUS, and train\
\
  THESEUS. Go, one of you, find out the forester;\
    For now our observation is perform'd,\
    And since we have the vaward of the day,\
    My love shall hear the music of my hounds. \
    Uncouple in the western valley; let them go.\
    Dispatch, I say, and find the forester.    Exit an ATTENDANT\
    We will, fair Queen, up to the mountain's top,\
    And mark the musical confusion\
    Of hounds and echo in conjunction.\
  HIPPOLYTA. I was with Hercules and Cadmus once\
    When in a wood of Crete they bay'd the bear\
    With hounds of Sparta; never did I hear\
    Such gallant chiding, for, besides the groves,\
    The skies, the fountains, every region near\
    Seem'd all one mutual cry. I never heard\
    So musical a discord, such sweet thunder.\
  THESEUS. My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,\
    So flew'd, so sanded; and their heads are hung\
    With ears that sweep away the morning dew;\
    Crook-knee'd and dew-lapp'd like Thessalian bulls;\
    Slow in pursuit, but match'd in mouth like bells,\
    Each under each. A cry more tuneable\
    Was never holla'd to, nor cheer'd with horn,\
    In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly. \
    Judge when you hear. But, soft, what nymphs are these?\
  EGEUS. My lord, this is my daughter here asleep,\
    And this Lysander, this Demetrius is,\
    This Helena, old Nedar's Helena.\
    I wonder of their being here together.\
  THESEUS. No doubt they rose up early to observe\
    The rite of May; and, hearing our intent,\
    Came here in grace of our solemnity.\
    But speak, Egeus; is not this the day\
    That Hermia should give answer of her choice?\
  EGEUS. It is, my lord.\
  THESEUS. Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns.\
                           [Horns and shout within. The sleepers\
                                     awake and kneel to THESEUS]\
    Good-morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past;\
    Begin these wood-birds but to couple now?\
  LYSANDER. Pardon, my lord.\
  THESEUS. I pray you all, stand up.\
    I know you two are rival enemies;\
    How comes this gentle concord in the world \
    That hatred is so far from jealousy\
    To sleep by hate, and fear no enmity?\
  LYSANDER. My lord, I shall reply amazedly,\
    Half sleep, half waking; but as yet, I swear,\
    I cannot truly say how I came here,\
    But, as I think- for truly would I speak,\
    And now I do bethink me, so it is-\
    I came with Hermia hither. Our intent\
    Was to be gone from Athens, where we might,\
    Without the peril of the Athenian law-\
  EGEUS. Enough, enough, my Lord; you have enough;\
    I beg the law, the law upon his head.\
    They would have stol'n away, they would, Demetrius,\
    Thereby to have defeated you and me:\
    You of your wife, and me of my consent,\
    Of my consent that she should be your wife.\
  DEMETRIUS. My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth,\
    Of this their purpose hither to this wood;\
    And I in fury hither followed them,\
    Fair Helena in fancy following me. \
    But, my good lord, I wot not by what power-\
    But by some power it is- my love to Hermia,\
    Melted as the snow, seems to me now\
    As the remembrance of an idle gaud\
    Which in my childhood I did dote upon;\
    And all the faith, the virtue of my heart,\
    The object and the pleasure of mine eye,\
    Is only Helena. To her, my lord,\
    Was I betroth'd ere I saw Hermia.\
    But, like a sickness, did I loathe this food;\
    But, as in health, come to my natural taste,\
    Now I do wish it, love it, long for it,\
    And will for evermore be true to it.\
  THESEUS. Fair lovers, you are fortunately met;\
    Of this discourse we more will hear anon.\
    Egeus, I will overbear your will;\
    For in the temple, by and by, with us\
    These couples shall eternally be knit.\
    And, for the morning now is something worn,\
    Our purpos'd hunting shall be set aside. \
    Away with us to Athens, three and three;\
    We'll hold a feast in great solemnity.\
    Come, Hippolyta.\
                     Exeunt THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, EGEUS, and train\
  DEMETRIUS. These things seem small and undistinguishable,\
    Like far-off mountains turned into clouds.\
  HERMIA. Methinks I see these things with parted eye,\
    When every thing seems double.\
  HELENA. So methinks;\
    And I have found Demetrius like a jewel,\
    Mine own, and not mine own.\
  DEMETRIUS. Are you sure\
    That we are awake? It seems to me\
    That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think\
    The Duke was here, and bid us follow him?\
  HERMIA. Yea, and my father.\
  HELENA. And Hippolyta.\
  LYSANDER. And he did bid us follow to the temple.\
  DEMETRIUS. Why, then, we are awake; let's follow him;\
    And by the way let us recount our dreams.             Exeunt \
  BOTTOM. [Awaking] When my cue comes, call me, and I will\
answer. My\
    next is 'Most fair Pyramus.' Heigh-ho! Peter Quince! Flute,\
the\
    bellows-mender! Snout, the tinker! Starveling! God's my life,\
    stol'n hence, and left me asleep! I have had a most rare\
vision.\
    I have had a dream, past the wit of man to say what dream it\
was.\
    Man is but an ass if he go about to expound this dream.\
Methought\
    I was- there is no man can tell what. Methought I was, and\
    methought I had, but man is but a patch'd fool, if he will\
offer\
    to say what methought I had. The eye of man hath not heard,\
the\
    ear of man hath not seen, man's hand is not able to taste,\
his\
    tongue to conceive, nor his heart to report, what my dream\
was. I\
    will get Peter Quince to write a ballad of this dream. It\
shall\
    be call'd 'Bottom's Dream,' because it hath no bottom; and I\
will\
    sing it in the latter end of a play, before the Duke.\
    Peradventure, to make it the more gracious, I shall sing it\
at\
    her death.                                              Exit\
\
\
\
\
SCENE II.\
Athens. QUINCE'S house\
\
Enter QUINCE, FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING\
\
  QUINCE. Have you sent to Bottom's house? Is he come home yet?\
  STARVELING. He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he is\
transported.\
  FLUTE. If he come not, then the play is marr'd; it goes not\
    forward, doth it?\
  QUINCE. It is not possible. You have not a man in all Athens\
able\
    to discharge Pyramus but he.\
  FLUTE. No; he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft man in\
    Athens.\
  QUINCE. Yea, and the best person too; and he is a very paramour\
for\
    a sweet voice.\
  FLUTE. You must say 'paragon.' A paramour is- God bless us!- A\
    thing of naught.\
\
                           Enter SNUG\
\
  SNUG. Masters, the Duke is coming from the temple; and there is\
two\
    or three lords and ladies more married. If our sport had gone\
\
    forward, we had all been made men.\
  FLUTE. O sweet bully Bottom! Thus hath he lost sixpence a day\
    during his life; he could not have scaped sixpence a day. An\
the\
    Duke had not given him sixpence a day for playing Pyramus,\
I'll\
    be hanged. He would have deserved it: sixpence a day in\
Pyramus,\
    or nothing.\
\
                           Enter BOTTOM\
\
  BOTTOM. Where are these lads? Where are these hearts?\
  QUINCE. Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy hour!\
  BOTTOM. Masters, I am to discourse wonders; but ask me not\
what;\
    for if I tell you, I am not true Athenian. I will tell you\
    everything, right as it fell out.\
  QUINCE. Let us hear, sweet Bottom.\
  BOTTOM. Not a word of me. All that I will tell you is, that the\
    Duke hath dined. Get your apparel together; good strings to\
your\
    beards, new ribbons to your pumps; meet presently at the\
palace;\
    every man look o'er his part; for the short and the long is,\
our\
    play is preferr'd. In any case, let Thisby have clean linen;\
and \
    let not him that plays the lion pare his nails, for they\
shall\
    hang out for the lion's claws. And, most dear actors, eat no\
    onions nor garlic, for we are to utter sweet breath; and I do\
not\
    doubt but to hear them say it is a sweet comedy. No more\
words.\
    Away, go, away!                                       Exeunt\
\
\
\
\
<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM\
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS\
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY\
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE\
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS\
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED\
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY\
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>\
\
\
\
ACT V. SCENE I.\
Athens. The palace of THESEUS\
\
Enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, PHILOSTRATE, LORDS, and ATTENDANTS\
\
  HIPPOLYTA. 'Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak\
of.\
  THESEUS. More strange than true. I never may believe\
    These antique fables, nor these fairy toys.\
    Lovers and madmen have such seething brains,\
    Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend\
    More than cool reason ever comprehends.\
    The lunatic, the lover, and the poet,\
    Are of imagination all compact.\
    One sees more devils than vast hell can hold;\
    That is the madman. The lover, all as frantic,\
    Sees Helen's beauty in a brow of Egypt.\
    The poet's eye, in a fine frenzy rolling,\
    Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;\
    And as imagination bodies forth\
    The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen\
    Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing \
    A local habitation and a name.\
    Such tricks hath strong imagination\
    That, if it would but apprehend some joy,\
    It comprehends some bringer of that joy;\
    Or in the night, imagining some fear,\
    How easy is a bush suppos'd a bear?\
  HIPPOLYTA. But all the story of the night told over,\
    And all their minds transfigur'd so together,\
    More witnesseth than fancy's images,\
    And grows to something of great constancy,\
    But howsoever strange and admirable.\
\
          Enter LYSANDER, DEMETRIUS, HERMIA, and HELENA\
\
  THESEUS. Here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth.\
    Joy, gentle friends, joy and fresh days of love\
    Accompany your hearts!\
  LYSANDER. More than to us\
    Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!\
  THESEUS. Come now; what masques, what dances shall we have, \
    To wear away this long age of three hours\
    Between our after-supper and bed-time?\
    Where is our usual manager of mirth?\
    What revels are in hand? Is there no play\
    To ease the anguish of a torturing hour?\
    Call Philostrate.\
  PHILOSTRATE. Here, mighty Theseus.\
  THESEUS. Say, what abridgment have you for this evening?\
    What masque? what music? How shall we beguile\
    The lazy time, if not with some delight?\
  PHILOSTRATE. There is a brief how many sports are ripe;\
    Make choice of which your Highness will see first.\
                                                [Giving a paper]\
  THESEUS. 'The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung\
    By an Athenian eunuch to the harp.'\
    We'll none of that: that have I told my love,\
    In glory of my kinsman Hercules.\
    'The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals,\
    Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage.'\
    That is an old device, and it was play'd \
    When I from Thebes came last a conqueror.\
    'The thrice three Muses mourning for the death\
    Of Learning, late deceas'd in beggary.'\
    That is some satire, keen and critical,\
    Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony.\
    'A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus\
    And his love Thisby; very tragical mirth.'\
    Merry and tragical! tedious and brief!\
    That is hot ice and wondrous strange snow.\
    How shall we find the concord of this discord?\
  PHILOSTRATE. A play there is, my lord, some ten words long,\
    Which is as brief as I have known a play;\
    But by ten words, my lord, it is too long,\
    Which makes it tedious; for in all the play\
    There is not one word apt, one player fitted.\
    And tragical, my noble lord, it is;\
    For Pyramus therein doth kill himself.\
    Which when I saw rehears'd, I must confess,\
    Made mine eyes water; but more merry tears\
    The passion of loud laughter never shed. \
  THESEUS. What are they that do play it?\
  PHILOSTRATE. Hard-handed men that work in Athens here,\
    Which never labour'd in their minds till now;\
    And now have toil'd their unbreathed memories\
    With this same play against your nuptial.\
  THESEUS. And we will hear it.\
  PHILOSTRATE. No, my noble lord,\
    It is not for you. I have heard it over,\
    And it is nothing, nothing in the world;\
    Unless you can find sport in their intents,\
    Extremely stretch'd and conn'd with cruel pain,\
    To do you service.\
  THESEUS. I will hear that play;\
    For never anything can be amiss\
    When simpleness and duty tender it.\
    Go, bring them in; and take your places, ladies.\
                                                Exit PHILOSTRATE\
  HIPPOLYTA. I love not to see wretchedness o'er-charged,\
    And duty in his service perishing.\
  THESEUS. Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing. \
  HIPPOLYTA. He says they can do nothing in this kind.\
  THESEUS. The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing.\
    Our sport shall be to take what they mistake;\
    And what poor duty cannot do, noble respect\
    Takes it in might, not merit.\
    Where I have come, great clerks have purposed\
    To greet me with premeditated welcomes;\
    Where I have seen them shiver and look pale,\
    Make periods in the midst of sentences,\
    Throttle their practis'd accent in their fears,\
    And, in conclusion, dumbly have broke off,\
    Not paying me a welcome. Trust me, sweet,\
    Out of this silence yet I pick'd a welcome;\
    And in the modesty of fearful duty\
    I read as much as from the rattling tongue\
    Of saucy and audacious eloquence.\
    Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity\
    In least speak most to my capacity.\
\
                       Re-enter PHILOSTRATE \
\
  PHILOSTRATE. SO please your Grace, the Prologue is address'd.\
  THESEUS. Let him approach.              [Flourish of trumpets]\
\
                 Enter QUINCE as the PROLOGUE\
\
  PROLOGUE. If we offend, it is with our good will.\
    That you should think, we come not to offend,\
    But with good will. To show our simple skill,\
    That is the true beginning of our end.\
    Consider then, we come but in despite.\
    We do not come, as minding to content you,\
    Our true intent is. All for your delight\
    We are not here. That you should here repent you,\
    The actors are at band; and, by their show,\
    You shall know all, that you are like to know,\
  THESEUS. This fellow doth not stand upon points.\
  LYSANDER. He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt; he knows\
not\
    the stop. A good moral, my lord: it is not enough to speak,\
but\
    to speak true. \
  HIPPOLYTA. Indeed he hath play'd on this prologue like a child\
on a\
    recorder- a sound, but not in government.\
  THESEUS. His speech was like a tangled chain; nothing im\
paired,\
    but all disordered. Who is next?\
\
          Enter, with a trumpet before them, as in dumb show,\
            PYRAMUS and THISBY, WALL, MOONSHINE, and LION\
\
  PROLOGUE. Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show;\
    But wonder on, till truth make all things plain.\
    This man is Pyramus, if you would know;\
    This beauteous lady Thisby is certain.\
    This man, with lime and rough-cast, doth present\
    Wall, that vile Wall which did these lovers sunder;\
    And through Walls chink, poor souls, they are content\
    To whisper. At the which let no man wonder.\
    This man, with lanthorn, dog, and bush of thorn,\
    Presenteth Moonshine; for, if you will know,\
    By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn\
    To meet at Ninus' tomb, there, there to woo. \
    This grisly beast, which Lion hight by name,\
    The trusty Thisby, coming first by night,\
    Did scare away, or rather did affright;\
    And as she fled, her mantle she did fall;\
    Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain.\
    Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall,\
    And finds his trusty Thisby's mantle slain;\
    Whereat with blade, with bloody blameful blade,\
    He bravely broach'd his boiling bloody breast;\
    And Thisby, tarrying in mulberry shade,\
    His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest,\
    Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain,\
    At large discourse while here they do remain.\
                               Exeunt PROLOGUE, PYRAMUS, THISBY,\
                                             LION, and MOONSHINE\
  THESEUS. I wonder if the lion be to speak.\
  DEMETRIUS. No wonder, my lord: one lion may, when many asses\
do.\
  WALL. In this same interlude it doth befall\
    That I, one Snout by name, present a wall;\
    And such a wall as I would have you think \
    That had in it a crannied hole or chink,\
    Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisby,\
    Did whisper often very secretly.\
    This loam, this rough-cast, and this stone, doth show\
    That I am that same wall; the truth is so;\
    And this the cranny is, right and sinister,\
    Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.\
  THESEUS. Would you desire lime and hair to speak better?\
  DEMETRIUS. It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard\
    discourse, my lord.\
\
                       Enter PYRAMUS\
\
  THESEUS. Pyramus draws near the wall; silence.\
  PYRAMUS. O grim-look'd night! O night with hue so black!\
    O night, which ever art when day is not!\
    O night, O night, alack, alack, alack,\
    I fear my Thisby's promise is forgot!\
    And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall,\
    That stand'st between her father's ground and mine; \
    Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and lovely wall,\
    Show me thy chink, to blink through with mine eyne.\
                                     [WALL holds up his fingers]\
    Thanks, courteous wall. Jove shield thee well for this!\
    But what see what see I? No Thisby do I see.\
    O wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss,\
    Curs'd he thy stones for thus deceiving me!\
  THESEUS. The wall, methinks, being sensible, should curse\
again.\
  PYRAMUS. No, in truth, sir, he should not. Deceiving me is\
Thisby's\
    cue. She is to enter now, and I am to spy her through the\
wall.\
    You shall see it will fall pat as I told you; yonder she\
comes.\
\
                          Enter THISBY\
\
  THISBY. O wall, full often hast thou beard my moans,\
    For parting my fair Pyramus and me!\
    My cherry lips have often kiss'd thy stones,\
    Thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee.\
  PYRAMUS. I see a voice; now will I to the chink,\
    To spy an I can hear my Thisby's face. \
    Thisby!\
  THISBY. My love! thou art my love, I think.\
  PYRAMUS. Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover's grace;\
    And like Limander am I trusty still.\
  THISBY. And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill.\
  PYRAMUS. Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.\
  THISBY. As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.\
  PYRAMUS. O, kiss me through the hole of this vile wall.\
  THISBY. I kiss the wall's hole, not your lips at all.\
  PYRAMUS. Wilt thou at Ninny's tomb meet me straightway?\
  THISBY. Tide life, tide death, I come without delay.\
                                       Exeunt PYRAMUS and THISBY\
  WALL. Thus have I, Wall, my part discharged so;\
    And, being done, thus Wall away doth go.           Exit WALL\
  THESEUS. Now is the moon used between the two neighbours.\
  DEMETRIUS. No remedy, my lord, when walls are so wilful to hear\
    without warning.\
  HIPPOLYTA. This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.\
  THESEUS. The best in this kind are but shadows; and the worst\
are\
    no worse, if imagination amend them. \
  HIPPOLYTA. It must be your imagination then, and not theirs.\
  THESEUS. If we imagine no worse of them than they of\
themselves,\
    they may pass for excellent men. Here come two noble beasts\
in, a\
    man and a lion.\
\
                   Enter LION and MOONSHINE\
\
  LION. You, ladies, you, whose gentle hearts do fear\
    The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor,\
    May now, perchance, both quake and tremble here,\
    When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar.\
    Then know that I as Snug the joiner am\
    A lion fell, nor else no lion's dam;\
    For, if I should as lion come in strife\
    Into this place, 'twere pity on my life.\
  THESEUS. A very gentle beast, and of a good conscience.\
  DEMETRIUS. The very best at a beast, my lord, that e'er I saw.\
  LYSANDER. This lion is a very fox for his valour.\
  THESEUS. True; and a goose for his discretion.\
  DEMETRIUS. Not so, my lord; for his valour cannot carry his \
    discretion, and the fox carries the goose.\
  THESEUS. His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his valour;\
for\
    the goose carries not the fox. It is well. Leave it to his\
    discretion, and let us listen to the Moon.\
  MOONSHINE. This lanthorn doth the horned moon present-\
  DEMETRIUS. He should have worn the horns on his head.\
  THESEUS. He is no crescent, and his horns are invisible within\
the\
    circumference.\
  MOONSHINE. This lanthorn doth the horned moon present;\
    Myself the Man i' th' Moon do seem to be.\
  THESEUS. This is the greatest error of all the rest; the man\
should\
    be put into the lantern. How is it else the man i' th' moon?\
  DEMETRIUS. He dares not come there for the candle; for, you\
see, it\
    is already in snuff.\
  HIPPOLYTA. I am aweary of this moon. Would he would change!\
  THESEUS. It appears, by his small light of discretion, that he\
is\
    in the wane; but yet, in courtesy, in all reason, we must\
stay\
    the time.\
  LYSANDER. Proceed, Moon.\
  MOON. All that I have to say is to tell you that the lanthorn\
is \
    the moon; I, the Man i' th' Moon; this thorn-bush, my\
thorn-bush;\
    and this dog, my dog.\
  DEMETRIUS. Why, all these should be in the lantern; for all\
these\
    are in the moon. But silence; here comes Thisby.\
\
                        Re-enter THISBY\
\
  THISBY. This is old Ninny's tomb. Where is my love?\
  LION. [Roaring] O-                           [THISBY runs off]\
  DEMETRIUS. Well roar'd, Lion.\
  THESEUS. Well run, Thisby.\
  HIPPOLYTA. Well shone, Moon. Truly, the moon shines with a good\
    grace.            [The LION tears THISBY'S Mantle, and exit]\
  THESEUS. Well mous'd, Lion.\
\
                        Re-enter PYRAMUS\
\
  DEMETRIUS. And then came Pyramus.\
  LYSANDER. And so the lion vanish'd.\
  PYRAMUS. Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams; \
    I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright;\
    For, by thy gracious golden, glittering gleams,\
    I trust to take of truest Thisby sight.\
             But stay, O spite!\
             But mark, poor knight,\
           What dreadful dole is here!\
             Eyes, do you see?\
             How can it he?\
           O dainty duck! O dear!\
             Thy mantle good,\
             What! stain'd with blood?\
           Approach, ye Furies fell.\
             O Fates! come, come;\
             Cut thread and thrum;\
           Quail, crush, conclude, and quell.\
  THESEUS. This passion, and the death of a dear friend, would go\
    near to make a man look sad.\
  HIPPOLYTA. Beshrew my heart, but I pity the man.\
  PYRAMUS. O wherefore, Nature, didst thou lions frame?\
    Since lion vile hath here deflower'd my dear; \
    Which is- no, no- which was the fairest dame\
    That liv'd, that lov'd, that lik'd, that look'd with cheer.\
             Come, tears, confound;\
             Out, sword, and wound\
           The pap of Pyramus;\
             Ay, that left pap,\
             Where heart doth hop.               [Stabs himself]\
           Thus die I, thus, thus, thus.\
             Now am I dead,\
             Now am I fled;\
           My soul is in the sky.\
             Tongue, lose thy light;\
             Moon, take thy flight.             [Exit MOONSHINE]\
           Now die, die, die, die, die.                   [Dies]\
  DEMETRIUS. No die, but an ace, for him; for he is but one.\
  LYSANDER. Less than an ace, man; for he is dead; he is nothing.\
  THESEUS. With the help of a surgeon he might yet recover and\
yet\
    prove an ass.\
  HIPPOLYTA. How chance Moonshine is gone before Thisby comes\
back\
    and finds her lover? \
\
                       Re-enter THISBY\
\
  THESEUS. She will find him by starlight. Here she comes; and\
her\
    passion ends the play.\
  HIPPOLYTA. Methinks she should not use a long one for such a\
    Pyramus; I hope she will be brief.\
  DEMETRIUS. A mote will turn the balance, which Pyramus, which\
    Thisby, is the better- he for a man, God warrant us: She for\
a\
    woman, God bless us!\
  LYSANDER. She hath spied him already with those sweet eyes.\
  DEMETRIUS. And thus she moans, videlicet:-\
  THISBY.      Asleep, my love?\
               What, dead, my dove?\
             O Pyramus, arise,\
               Speak, speak. Quite dumb?\
               Dead, dead? A tomb\
             Must cover thy sweet eyes.\
               These lily lips,\
               This cherry nose, \
             These yellow cowslip cheeks,\
               Are gone, are gone;\
               Lovers, make moan;\
             His eyes were green as leeks.\
               O Sisters Three,\
               Come, come to me,\
             With hands as pale as milk;\
               Lay them in gore,\
               Since you have shore\
             With shears his thread of silk.\
               Tongue, not a word.\
               Come, trusty sword;\
             Come, blade, my breast imbrue.      [Stabs herself]\
               And farewell, friends;\
               Thus Thisby ends;\
             Adieu, adieu, adieu.                         [Dies]\
  THESEUS. Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead.\
  DEMETRIUS. Ay, and Wall too.\
  BOTTOM. [Starting up] No, I assure you; the wall is down that\
    parted their fathers. Will it please you to see the Epilogue,\
or \
    to hear a Bergomask dance between two of our company?\
  THESEUS. No epilogue, I pray you; for your play needs no\
excuse.\
    Never excuse; for when the players are all dead there need\
none\
    to be blamed. Marry, if he that writ it had played Pyramus,\
and\
    hang'd himself in Thisby's garter, it would have been a fine\
    tragedy. And so it is, truly; and very notably discharg'd.\
But\
    come, your Bergomask; let your epilogue alone.     [A dance]\
    The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve.\
    Lovers, to bed; 'tis almost fairy time.\
    I fear we shall out-sleep the coming morn,\
    As much as we this night have overwatch'd.\
    This palpable-gross play hath well beguil'd\
    The heavy gait of night. Sweet friends, to bed.\
    A fortnight hold we this solemnity,\
    In nightly revels and new jollity.                    Exeunt\
\
                     Enter PUCK with a broom\
\
  PUCK.      Now the hungry lion roars,\
             And the wolf behowls the moon; \
             Whilst the heavy ploughman snores,\
             All with weary task fordone.\
             Now the wasted brands do glow,\
             Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,\
             Puts the wretch that lies in woe\
             In remembrance of a shroud.\
             Now it is the time of night\
             That the graves, all gaping wide,\
             Every one lets forth his sprite,\
             In the church-way paths to glide.\
             And we fairies, that do run\
             By the triple Hecate's team\
             From the presence of the sun,\
             Following darkness like a dream,\
             Now are frolic. Not a mouse\
             Shall disturb this hallowed house.\
             I am sent with broom before,\
             To sweep the dust behind the door.\
\
         Enter OBERON and TITANIA, with all their train \
\
  OBERON.    Through the house give glimmering light,\
             By the dead and drowsy fire;\
             Every elf and fairy sprite\
             Hop as light as bird from brier;\
             And this ditty, after me,\
             Sing and dance it trippingly.\
  TITANIA.      First, rehearse your song by rote,\
                To each word a warbling note;\
                Hand in hand, with fairy grace,\
                Will we sing, and bless this place.\
\
           [OBERON leading, the FAIRIES sing and dance]\
\
  OBERON.    Now, until the break of day,\
             Through this house each fairy stray.\
             To the best bride-bed will we,\
             Which by us shall blessed be;\
             And the issue there create\
             Ever shall be fortunate. \
             So shall all the couples three\
             Ever true in loving be;\
             And the blots of Nature's hand\
             Shall not in their issue stand;\
             Never mole, hare-lip, nor scar,\
             Nor mark prodigious, such as are\
             Despised in nativity,\
             Shall upon their children be.\
             With this field-dew consecrate,\
             Every fairy take his gait,\
             And each several chamber bless,\
             Through this palace, with sweet peace;\
             And the owner of it blest\
             Ever shall in safety rest.\
             Trip away; make no stay;\
             Meet me all by break of day.    Exeunt all but PUCK\
  PUCK.      If we shadows have offended,\
             Think but this, and all is mended,\
             That you have but slumb'red here\
             While these visions did appear. \
             And this weak and idle theme,\
             No more yielding but a dream,\
             Gentles, do not reprehend.\
             If you pardon, we will mend.\
             And, as I am an honest Puck,\
             If we have unearned luck\
             Now to scape the serpent's tongue,\
             We will make amends ere long;\
             Else the Puck a liar call.\
             So, good night unto you all.\
             Give me your hands, if we be friends,\
             And Robin shall restore amends.                Exit\
\
THE END\
\
\
\
\
\
<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM\
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS\
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY\
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE\
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS\
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED\
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY\
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>\
\
\
\
\
\
End of this Etext of The Complete Works of William Shakespeare\
A Midsummer Night's Dream\
\
}